Nicola Sturgeon took a step closer to triggering a major constitutional crisis today warning it was 'very likely' the Scottish Government would refuse to agree flagship Brexit laws.
The First Minister said Westminster's current offer on devolution after Brexit was still not good enough.
The Scottish Parliament must normally pass a 'legislative consent motion' for the EU Withdrawal Bill to become law and Ms Sturgeon has repeatedly warned she will not move a motion without new safeguards.
Ministers in Westminster can technically press ahead with the laws - which copy EU rules into British law ahead of exit day - without Scottish permission.
But doing so would be unprecedented since devolution and would trigger a major row between London and Edinburgh. 
Ms Sturgeon has separately launched her own set of laws in Scotland that would mirror the Westminster legislation with extra safeguards for devolution.
The First Minister has done so despite the Scottish Parliament's presiding officer - the equivalent of Commons Speaker John Bercow - saying it is outside Holyrood's powers. Ms Sturgeon has the support of Scotland's top law officer. 
Cabinet minister David Lidington on Monday said the UK Government had committed to the devolved administrations the 'vast majority' of powers returning from Brussels will start off in Edinburgh, Cardiff and Belfast rather than Whitehall.
Downing Street today it had made a 'considerable offer' to the Scottish Government and would continue to work on finding an agreement. 
But Ms Sturgeon said Holyrood is simply trying to protect the powers that the Scottish Parliament already has over areas such as agriculture, fishing, environmental policy, food standards, justice and health.
She told BBC Radio 4: 'After Brexit, in terms of the devolution settlement, those powers should return to the Scottish Parliament and it should be up to us how we exercise them.
'What the Withdrawal Bill seeks to do is restrict and constrain the ability of the Scottish Parliament or the Welsh Assembly to legislate in these devolved areas .
'Westminster effectively wants to be able to impose uniformity in these areas and that's not acceptable in terms of the broad sweep and fundamentals of the devolution settlement.'
Speaking later at the Association of British Insurers's Conference, Ms Sturgeon insisted: 'We've been trying to avoid getting into the position where we can't recommend consent to the Withdrawal Bill, which the devolved administrations have got to do.
'We've put down amendments, we've been talking for months to the UK Government to try to get a compromise, we even drafted what that compromise looks like and they've failed to really do what needs to be done to get an agreement.'
Ms Sturgeon welcomed Jeremy Corbyn's announcement on Monday that Labour would seek to form a 'new and comprehensive' UK-EU customs union to ensure tariff-free trade after Brexit as 'movement' and said she hopes Labour is on a journey towards embracing a single market/customs union outcome.
She said there is a chance of seeing a majority in the House of Commons that could keep the UK in the single market and the customs union.
However, she said there is equally a 'very real risk' that the UK could 'crash out' of the EU without a deal.
 
Nigel Farage's election campaign backfired last night as he was abandoned by three candidates and one of his financial backers.
The Brexit Party leader accused the Tories of arrogance after Jacob Rees-Mogg urged him not to split the Leave vote.
But as Mr Farage unveiled more than 600 candidates he is fielding across the country, he faced a backlash from his own supporters.
Two candidates withdrew over fears that the Brexit Party could prevent Boris Johnson getting a majority, while a third dropped out for personal reasons.
Meanwhile, one of the Brexit Party's donors revealed he would support the Tories at the election, warning that Mr Farage risked hindering the Brexit cause.
Property developer Jeffrey Hobby, who donated £10,000 to Mr Farage's party ahead of the European Parliament elections in May, said he believed Mr Johnson was doing a 'fantastic job'. 
He added: 'It is a shame if Nigel Farage wants to take him on across the country, I don't think that is helpful for the Brexit Party, the Tory Party or the cause.
'For the Brexit Party to field candidates across all seats seems a waste of resources and not the wisest move.'
Mr Farage wants Mr Johnson to abandon his Brexit deal, but Mr Hobby said that while it was not 'ideal', backing it was 'probably the most pragmatic position', adding: 'There is a real need to move forward, get behind the deal and accept that you can pick holes in any deal but it probably does the job it needs to.'
Adding to Mr Farage's woes, Paul Brothwood, his candidate for Dudley South in the West Midlands, quit yesterday and endorsed local Tory MP Mike Wood. 
Mr Brothwood said he was 'confident that Boris Johnson is the best person to stand up for Britain'.
Stephen Peddie, who was due to stand in Tonbridge and Malling in Kent, also announced he was withdrawing, accusing Mr Farage of pursuing a 'fantastical and dangerous strategy' and warning that the Brexit Party was 'evolving from a national asset to a national threat'.
He added: 'We have a Brexit only because of Farage – that doesn't make it his to destroy along with our country.
'I've quit in exasperation. I suspect I'm far from alone.'
Dan Day-Robinson, who was standing in Devizes, Wiltshire, said he was quitting because his partner was pregnant.
Mr Farage accused Tory Brexiteers of being 'good little boys' yesterday by falling into line behind Mr Johnson.
He said he had abandoned any idea of an electoral pact with Mr Johnson, adding: 'What is the point? Jacob said we should stand aside and just allow him to betray us nice and slowly. It is ludicrous. Their attitude to the Brexit Party is arrogant and conceited.'
Mr Rees-Mogg was among senior Tories who criticised Mr Farage's plan to run more than 600 candidates. The Commons Leader insisted Mr Johnson's deal represented a 'complete Brexit', and called on Mr Farage to recognise the campaign to leave the EU had been a success.
Speaking of Mr Farage, he told LBC: 'It would be a great shame if he carries on fighting after he has already won to snatch defeat from the jaws of victory.'
Nigel Farage today said he will be mothballing the Brexit Party so that he can bring it back if Boris Johnson makes a 'mess' of the UK's departure from the European Union. 
Mr Farage claimed his latest political vehicle could go down in history as the 'shortest lived but most successful party ever' after it helped guide Britain towards it split from Brussels. 
Meanwhile, the veteran Eurosceptic left the door open to appearing on reality television programmes like I'm A Celebrity... Get Me Out Of Here now that his time as an MEP is coming to an end. 
However, he conceded the British public's love hate relationship with him would likely result in him being on 'every bloomin' [bush tucker] trial there is'.
Mr Farage said it was 'unbelievable' to see the UK about to leave the EU after he spent his entire political life fighting for it. 
Britain will cease to have any MEPs on January 31 when Britain's divorce from Brussels finally goes through. 
Asked what the point of the Brexit Party was now that the split is actually happening, Mr Farage told ITV's This Morning programme: 'What I'll do now is put it [The Brexit Party} on care and maintenance, just in case they make a mess of it.
'In 2016, I actually believed that Mrs May was going to do the thing properly… I was wrong, so I'm not going to close it [the Brexit Party] down. 
'But I think the truth of it is that Boris Johnson knows that he has got a big Parliamentary majority. If he goes soft on this he'd lose in five years time. I'm actually quite optimistic.'
Mr Farage added: 'History may say it [the Brexit Party] was the shortest lived but most successful party ever.'
The Brexit Party leader was asked what he plans to do next now that the goal of his life's work is coming to fruition. 
He suggested he was open to appearing on I'm A Celebrity as he said: 'Well, you never know!
'I don't know. The jungle have been after me a couple of times, they have.'
He said he had not been tempted to appear on the show in the past because of his political ambitions but suggested post-Brexit that could change.  
'No, because the Brexit thing wasn't done and I thought I've got to stick around,' he said. 
'It is done now. I'd be on every bloomin' trial there is! Because the problem with having an opinion is, whilst some people love you, a lot don't.'
Mr Farage also hinted he is open to taking part on Strictly Come Dancing - 'let's see what comes' - but categorically ruled out an appearance on Dancing On Ice.
Asked if he can ice skate, he said: 'No, I'm not doing that! Absolutely not doing that.
'We'll see what life brings. I was once quite normal, I had a business, young family. I got involved in politics, this was my cause. 
'I'm just going to spend a bit of time after 1st February just reflecting that a big chapter of my life is over. I'll take the time.'
Nigel Farage has shared a letter on Twitter he says is from a 10-year-old boy claiming his school is 'brain-washing' him in to being 'pro-EU'.
The letter, from Matthew, who says he is 'a ten-year-old boy', starts 'I am writing to express my gratitude to you and your party'.
The Brexit Party leader shared a photograph to Twitter saying: 'An amazing letter received from fellow leaver Matthew, who is 10 years old.'
It reads: 'Without you the Leave Voters would have nobody to represent their opinions as the majority of MPs in parliament want to ignore democracy and overturn the referendum result. 
'At my school they try and brain wash us to be pro-EU but me and my friend Jim (fellow leaver) know their tricks. 
'Many thanks and good luck. From Matthew.'
The young schoolboy seems to have taken the time to write a letter in his neatest handwriting — but Twitter users are not convinced. 
Robert Webb, a comedy writer and performer according to his Twitter bio, wrote: 'Amazing indeed. I just wonder which decade Matthew was taught to write his 'f's. 
'Anyway, good old Matthew and Jim. And presumably if he's impressed with this, Farage is now in favour of votes at 16. Great. Bring it on.'
Another tweet, from Kate Wilton, read: 'That letter is not from a ten-year-old Brexit supporter.
'For starters he uses the correct use of their and can spell Parliament and democracy, something most Brexit Party supporting adults clearly struggle with.'
Another Twitter user was ready to believe the letter was real — but only if it had been signed off with a girl's name.
Arzy Del wrote: 'If he'd made it to be from a girl, it might just be believable, but no ten-year-old boy writes that neatly!' 
Others agreed the handwriting was 'far too near'. Zazkia said: 'Even their writing is far too neat. 
'At that age my writing looked like a spider fell in to a pot of ink and ran across the paper.' 
The letter, dated May 22, 2019, claimed Nigel Farage was the voice of the 17.4million British people who voted Leave.
It comes just days after the Brexit Party leader said he would make an election pact with the Tories — but only if Boris Johnson pushes through No Deal by Halloween.
The Brexit Party leader softened his stance against an arrangement that could stave off the threat from Jeremy Corbyn in dozens of seats across the country.
Tory donors are believed to be pushing for an agreement that Mr Farage's fledgling party will not split the vote by running against Eurosceptics. 
In return, the Tories could stand aside in northern metropolitan areas where the Brexit Party has a better chance of defeating Labour.
Mr Farage said earlier this week that he did not 'trust' PM in-waiting Mr Johnson enough, but now says he could support him if he takes a tough line on Brexit.  
Nigel Farage warned of violence on the streets if Brexit is denied as he engaged in angry clashes with Gina Miller on live TV today.
The businesswoman and former model insisted the Ukip leader should be her 'biggest fan' because her High Court case had restored power to parliament.
But Mr Farage hit back by warning of riots if the outcome of the historic EU referendum result was not implements, asking her: 'What part of the word "leave" don't you understand?'
The explosive exchanges came as the pair appeared together on the BBC's Andrew Marr programme this morning.
The shock High Court judgement last week is threatening to tear apart Theresa May's timetable for cutting ties with Brussels.
The judges endorsed the case brought by Ms Miller and Remain supporters allies that the PM cannot invoke Article 50 - the formal mechanism for leaving the EU - without votes in parliament.
The government has argued that it is able to launch the process using ancient Royal Prerogative powers, which are used for actions such as taking the country to war. 
The case is now slated for a dramatic showdown in the Supreme Court next month, which could potentially shape the future of the country. If ministers are forced to pass legislation MPs and peers are expected to fight a rearguard action to limit the scope of Brexit and keep us in the single market. 
Mrs May insisted today that she disagreed with the verdict, and saying that she was determined to implement the will of the people 'in full'.
Speaking today, Ms Miller told Mr Farage he should be her 'biggest fan'. 
But the Ukip leader retorted: 'I just want to ask her what part of the word leave don't you understand?' 
Ms Miller shot back: 'Have you read the case?'
Mr Farage pressed Ms Miller over whether she wants the UK to remain part of the single market, prompting her to reply: 'I'm not the politician here. I'm the person who saw the elephant in the room, which is there's no legal certainty.
'You should actually be my biggest fan because I've just created the legal certainty so that Theresa May can now, rather than appealing, go ahead, have the debate and leave - not interrupt her timetable.'
Mr Farage accused Ms Miller of giving those in Parliament who argue the referendum does not mean Britain should leave the single market 'the chance, effectively, to overturn' Mrs May's wish and mandate her.
He added: 'If that happens, you will have stirred up, I think, the biggest political upset we've ever seen... 
'This is not about whether Parliament is sovereign, it's about whether the British people are sovereign.
'That's the real argument here and for you as a pro-EU supporter to talk about parliamentary sovereignty in Britain is a bit rich, isn't it?' 

Mr Farage said: 'We may have seen Bob Geldof and 40,000 people in Parliament Square moaning about Brexit,' he said.
'But believe you me if people in this country think that they're going to be cheated, they're going to be betrayed, then we will see political anger the likes of which none of us in our lifetimes have ever witnessed in this country.
Asked whether that could mean 'disturbances in the street', he replied: 'Yeah, I think that's right.'
Ms Miller said it was 'misdirection' to claim that the decision was unpicking parliamentary sovereignty.
'The case is that she cannot use something called the Royal Prerogative to do it because we do not live in a tin-pot dictatorship.'
Health Secretary Jeremy Hunt said it was 'highly unlikely' the Commons would seek to block Brexit by voting against the triggering of Article 50.
But he warned that MPs and peers could undermine Mrs May's negotiating position by trying to get her to spell out her priorities.
'Our concern is a more fundamental one, which is if you are a Remainer and you are worried about the decision taken by the British people - I was a Remainer until June 23 - and you are worried about the impact on the economy, the impact on the economy will be far worse if through some parliamentary mechanisms Theresa May is forced to lay out her entire negotiating strategy,' he told the Marr show.
'And there's a confusion here – parliament passes laws, it always has, but governments negotiate treaties. And the reason parliament can't negotiate treaties is because you can't decide an international treaty by a simply vote of MPs.
'There is another party involved there is negotiation, there is to and fro and in that situation you have to give the Government latitude to make a deal.'
Mr Hunt signalled similar concerns to Mr Farage about the threat of unrest if the referendum result was not honoured.  
'For people who are worried about the impact of Brexit on the economy or whatever else it is, the damage to the fabric of our democracy will be far, far worse if people felt the establishment was trying to unpick a decision that was made,' he said. 

And he attempted to cool mounting speculation that Mrs May could opt to call a snap general election if parliament frustrates the Brexit process.
'I think a general election is, frankly, the last thing that the Government wants. Theresa May wants to get on with the job, and frankly it's the last thing that the British people want, with all these very, very important national decisions. I think because of that, I think it is highly unlikely that parliament would not, in the end, back a decision to trigger Article 50,' he said. 

It was the night when the behaviour of our MPs provoked levels of chaos never before seen in the mother of Parliaments.
After a week of late-night votes, furious Brexit rows and insults hurled across the Chamber, the Commons was formally ‘prorogued’ – or closed – until October 14.
But Opposition MPs then staged a ‘ludicrous playground stunt’ in the House of Commons in protest.
About a dozen MPs, including members of Jeremy Corbyn’s frontbench, held up signs saying ‘Silenced’ in the early hours of yesterday morning and shouted ‘shame on you’.
Amid farcical scenes that reminded observers of punch-ups in foreign legislatures, they also made a show of trying to hold Speaker John Bercow by his legs in his chair to prevent the prorogation ceremony from taking place.
Footage of the incident shows one Commons official hauling Labour MP Lloyd Russell-Moyle away from the Speaker. 
Also involved were Labour frontbenchers Dawn Butler and Clive Lewis and Green MP Caroline Lucas. Officials then stood beside the Speaker’s chair to block access.
Yesterday Tory MPs condemned the student-style protest – which happened just minutes after Labour, Liberal Democrats and Scottish Nationalists once again refused to back a snap election.
Defence minister Johnny Mercer said the MPs were being ‘spiteful, rowdy, dishonest and unwilling to submit themselves to a public who pay their wages’. 
Culture minister Nigel Adams branded the protest a ‘ludicrous playground stunt’.
Conservative backbencher Bob Seely said the situation was an ‘utter farce’. Labour’s John Mann agreed, describing the behaviour as a ‘pantomime’.
How the night of shame unfolded:
Shortly after 12.30 on Tuesday morning, MPs vote on a motion for an early election. 
Before the vote, Boris Johnson accuses Labour and other Opposition parties of ‘preposterous cowardice’ for opposing the move and accused Mr Corbyn of ‘dither and delay’. 
In the vote, 293 MPs back the motion and 46 vote against with vast numbers of abstentions. 
The motion passes but fails to reach the two-thirds threshold required by the Fixed-Term Parliaments Act. The prorogation ceremonials then begin.
Sarah Clarke, who holds the ancient office of Black Rod, enters the Commons chamber shortly before 1.20am, having walked from the Lords. 
She is heckled as she delivers the message that Parliament will be prorogued and when she calls for MPs to come to the Lords, as is tradition, Opposition politicians bellow ‘No!’
At the same time, a dozen MPs, including Labour frontbenchers, gather by the Speaker’s chair, holding up slightly pathetic pieces of paper with ‘Silenced’ written on them and chanting ‘shame on you’. 
Labour MP Lloyd Russell-Moyle holds down the Speaker’s legs to try to keep him in his chair. 
With the House in uproar, a scuffle ensues. Eventually the doorkeepers – Commons staff – are forced to intervene to haul the MPs out of the way.
After delaying his speech, thereby allowing the pantomime to play out, Mr Bercow takes on a mournful tone. 
He declares his ‘respect’ for Black Rod and says he recognises ‘our presence is desired’. 
‘They are doing what they believe to be right and I recognise my role in this matter.’ 
One Tory MP shouts: ‘Oh, I can’t deal with this!’ sparking a sharp slapdown from Mr Bercow. 
The Speaker then launches into a lengthy condemnation of the suspension, calling it ‘one of the longest for decades’ and an ‘act of executive fiat’. 
One Tory bellows: ‘Do your job, for which you’re handsomely paid.’
After milking every second of the spotlight, Bercow finally succumbs to the inevitable and gets down from his chair. 
But not before he says he ‘completely understands’ why ‘large numbers of members are much more comfortable staying where they are’. 
It’s clear he is aware of MPs’ plans to stay in their seats in protest instead of walking to the Lords with him. 
He leaves the chamber to applause from Labour and other Opposition MPs. SNP leader Ian Blackford cravenly leaps off his seat to shake the Speaker’s hand when he passes.
While the Government benches empty and MPs walk to the Lords, Opposition MPs stay in their seats and start singing. 
Labour MPs opt for the socialist anthem The Red Flag, while Scottish Nationalists sing Scots Wha Hae and Welsh MPs sing Bread of Heaven. 
Remain MPs also hum the EU anthem, Ode to Joy. When Mr Bercow comes back from the Lords, he is greeted with a standing ovation. Their hero had returned!
Standing at the clerk’s desk in front of the Speaker’s chair, Mr Bercow puts on his best sad face and announces that Parliament has been prorogued until Monday, October 14. 
MPs shout ‘shame’. The vast majority of Tories show their contempt for the Speaker by not returning to the chamber. 
Usually MPs of all parties shake hands with each other and the Speaker at prorogation. 
Instead, Mr Corbyn leads Labour MPs to shake hands with Mr Bercow, and the two men enjoy a friendly chat.
My party is a disgrace... by veteran ex Labour MP! 
By Ian Austin MP for the Daily Mail 
I did not leave the Labour party to join another party – I left the Labour party to shine a spotlight on the disgrace it has become under the Leader of the Opposition’s leadership and because I regard myself as proper, decent, traditional Labour, not like the extremists who have taken over this party and are dragging it into the mud. That is the point I am going to make in this debate.
These are people – the Leader of the Opposition, the Shadow Chancellor – who have spent their entire time in politics working with and defending all sorts of extremists, and in some cases terrorists and anti-Semites. We should remember what these people said about the IRA.
It might be ancient history to the Labour party’s new young recruits, but many people will never forget how they supported terrorists responsible for horrific carnage in a brutal civil war that saw people blown up in pubs and hotels and shopping centres.
A few weeks after the IRA blew up a hotel in Brighton and murdered five people at the Tory party conference, the Leader of the Opposition invited two suspected IRA terrorists to Parliament. When the man responsible for planting that bomb was put on trial, he protested outside the court.
The Shadow Chancellor said that “those people involved in the armed struggle” – people he said had used “bombs and bullets”– should be honoured. And they have the brass neck to lecture anybody about the rule of law! What a disgrace.
This is a debate about whether politicians can be trusted to obey the rule of law, and there is not a single Labour figure in the past – not a single one – who would have backed violent street protest, as the Shadow Chancellor did when he called for “insurrection” to “bring down” the Government, or praised rioters who he said had “kicked the s***” out of the Conservative Party’s offices.
After a Labour MP said he should join the Tories Mr Austin added:
She might not want to hear it, but I will tell her this: I am here because voters in Dudley North sent me here to represent them, and none of my views have changed on any of the things I stand up for: decency in politics, the rule of law. And everybody in Dudley knew exactly what I thought of these people at the last election. And I will tell the honourable lady this: I will make absolutely certain she is going to have to answer to her voters for these points at the next election.
No other senior figure in the Labour Party’s history would have joked about lynching a female member of parliament. These people do not believe in the rule of law abroad, either. They always back the wrong side, whether it is the IRA, Hamas or Hezbollah, who they describe as friends. No previous Labour leader would have supported brutal totalitarian dictatorships like the ones in Cuba or Venezuela that have no regard whatsoever for the rule of law.
No previous Labour leadership would have allowed a party with a proud history of fighting racial prejudice to have been poisoned by racism – which is what has happened under these people – against Jewish people, to the extent that members have been arrested on suspicion of racial hatred, and the party itself has become the first in history to be investigated under equalities laws by the Equality and Human Rights Commission.
These people, and the people around them, are a million miles away from the traditional mainstream, decent politics of the Labour party. They have poisoned what was once a great party with extremism, and they cannot be trusted with the institutions that underpin our democracy. They are completely unfit to lead the Labour party, let alone our country.
Boris Johnson will make his comeback at Tory party conference next month - just as Brexit negotiations reach their climax.
The former Foreign Secretary has agreed to give a keynote speech at a fringe event during the four-day gathering in Birmingham, the Daily Mail has learnt.
His decision to speak comes after party chiefs last week launched disciplinary proceedings against him over his comments on the burka.
The intervention will prove a nightmare for Theresa May as she attempts to unite the party faithful around her Chequers plan.
The conference will take place as Brexit talks will be at a crucial stage.
Just ten days before the annual event kicks off on 30 September, Mrs May will fly to Salzburg for a meeting of EU leaders where they hope to make a breakthrough.
Both the UK and Brussels have said they are aiming to get a deal agreed in October.
Mr Johnson's comeback will snatch attention from Mrs May at the critical moment. Downing Street had hoped the Prime Minister and her Cabinet would be able to use the conference to sell her Brexit plan directly to party members. So far many rank-and-file Tories have shown reluctance to get behind the proposals.
Mr Johnson has largely avoided speaking on Brexit since he resigned as Foreign Secretary last month, days after the Cabinet agreed to the Chequers plan.
In his bombshell resignation letter, he warned Mrs May that the Brexit 'dream is dying' and claimed her plan would mean Britain taking on 'the status of a colony'.
But since then his remarks on the subject have been limited and allies say he has decided to take a vow of silence on the issue over the summer.
However, it is expected that Mr Johnson will find it impossible to resist setting out his views about Brexit during his speech to party members. Mr Johnson has so far agreed to take part in one fringe event, with discussions ongoing about possible further appearances.
 Tory backbencher Jacob Rees-Mogg became one of the main stars of last year's conference as he attracted huge crowds to a series of speeches he made on the fringe.
Allies of the Prime Minister will be concerned the platform will give Mr Johnson an opportunity to rally support amongst the membership ahead of a potential leadership bid.
A friend of Mr Johnson last night said: 'Boris has always been the biggest draw. He will make the fringe meeting look like the conference hall - and the conference hall look like a fringe meeting.'
Party chiefs are currently facing pressure from both Tory grandees and the grassroots to halt disciplinary proceedings against Mr Johnson over comments he made about the burka.
The party launched an investigation into Mr Johnson last Thursday after it received a number of complaints about a newspaper article in which he compared Muslim women who wear the face-veils to 'letter boxes' and 'bank robbers'.
Party chairman Brandon Lewis and the Prime Minister both demanded that Mr Johnson apologise for the remarks, but he has refused.
Several opinion polls and surveys have shown the public largely support Mr Johnson over the row.
Nissan threatened to close its operations in the UK unless it received guarantees that it would not lose out from Brexit, it was claimed last night.
The Japanese car giant warned ministers that production would be switched to plants in France and Spain unless they gave assurances that its competitive position would not be damaged by Britain leaving the EU, it was reported.
The move could have led to the closure of the firm’s flagship plant in Sunderland, costing 7,000 jobs and creating a political crisis for the Government.
It was averted after Theresa May agreed ‘support and assurances’ with Nissan boss Carlos Ghosn this month, which were formalised by Business Secretary Greg Clark in a letter following further talks in Japan, sources told the Financial Times.
Nissan and No 10 both denied that the potential closure of Sunderland was discussed directly by Mrs May and Mr Ghosn.
But the revelations about Nissan’s hardball tactics will fuel speculation about the nature of the guarantees offered by Britain.
Mr Clark is now set to be hauled before MPs over Labour claims he offered ‘bribes’ to Nissan to stay in the UK. Mr Clark did not deny he had offered written assurances to the firm in a letter. But he told BBC Question Time that no financial favours were offered, insisting: ‘There’s no cheque book. I don’t have a cheque book.’
The car manufacturer announced on Thursday it will increase production at its flagship Sunderland plant. The investment, which will see the new Qashqai and X-Trail models built in the North East, was hailed by Mrs May as a major boost for the economy.
It will also secure the future of the plant and see production expand.
But ministers were last night under mounting pressure to ‘come clean’ about the exact nature of the promises made to the company.
Labour business spokesman Clive Lewis said: ‘Public chaos and secret backroom deals are not going to sustain business confidence.
‘Does the Government have an industrial strategy or is the plan just to hand out bribes?’
Iain Wright, Labour chairman of the Commons business committee, welcomed the Nissan deal, but said Mr Clark would be summoned to explain what inducements were offered to the firm.
He said: ‘In terms of transparency, in respect of how Government will intervene and provide that reassurance and support, I do think that’s important.’
But Downing Street said there was ‘no compensation package’ offered to Nissan, adding that there was ‘nothing about tariffs’ in the assurances offered to the firm. Nissan also denied it had received any sort of ‘special deal’ from the Government.
But former business minister Anna Soubry, who had extensive dealings with Nissan until she was sacked this summer, said she would be ‘very surprised’ if the firm had acted without guarantees that the Government would offset any tariffs.
Miss Soubry, an outspoken supporter of EU membership, said she met Nissan on June 30, a week after the Brexit vote, and that the company expressed ‘profound concerns’, about tariffs, and had suggested production could be relocated to a Renault plant in France.
‘They made it very clear that without a guarantee that they would not be subject to tariffs or if they were subject to tariffs the Government would do something to mitigate the damage of tariffs,’ she added.
‘Without that, they told me, my understanding actually was that they would go to Renault because they clearly had the capacity there.’
No 10 refused to confirm that assurances to Nissan were written down in a letter.
A spokesman said only that ministers used ‘all forms of communication’ to discuss Nissan’s concerns.
But it is understood Mr Clark did offer written assurances to the firm ahead of this week’s announcement.
It is thought they included guarantees that the Government’s new industrial strategy would include focus on investment in research into new technologies, including electric cars.
No 10 today insisted Theresa May has met Michael Heseltine hours after he claimed otherwise in an extraordinary public row.
In bizarre scenes, Lord Heseltine announced his own firing last night and today claimed he had never met the Prime Minister despite the pair sharing decades at the top of the Conservative Party.
Mrs May's official spokesman thanked the former Cabinet member for his service in a series of unpaid advisory roles but said his rebellion over the Brexit Bill was not compatible with Government policy.
The sacking was carried out by the Lords chief whip and Mrs May will not send a personal letter, as is convention when ministers are fired.  
Lord Heseltine today insisted he had no regrets over rebelling against the party line by backing calls for a 'meaningful' vote on the final Brexit deal last night.






Scroll down for video 

The Prime Minister suffered a second defeat over the legislation to authorise the triggering of our EU divorce last night.  
Peers backed Lord Heseltine's controversial cross party amendment by a majority of 98, voting 366 to 268 in favour, prompting fury from Brexit Secretary David Davis.
He accused peers of trying to 'frustrate' Britain's exit from the European Union and insisted the Government intends to overturn the result.

Lord Heseltine was asked to help the Government with plans to restore deprived estates under David Cameron and he also worked with George Osborne on plans for east London.
He advised on plans for a Swansea city deal and has been working with the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy.
The peer was also a national infrastructure commissioner.



Lord Heseltine said he was forced to abandon dinner with his wife to receive his marching orders from chief whip Lord Taylor of Holbeach after the vote and debate on the Brexit Bill, in which he warned that quitting the European Union was the 'most momentous peacetime decision of our time'.
The former deputy prime minister said he knew there could be consequences if he rebelled but he was not warned that he could lose his roles advising the Government on a number of areas, including its industrial strategy.
He said: 'I heard nothing from Number 10, I've had no relationship with Number 10 since the new Prime Minister (Mrs May).
'But I'm not complaining, I was getting on with the job that I was doing.'
He refused to comment on suggestions that his sacking was designed to intimidate Tory MPs who are considering rebelling when the 'meaningful vote' amendment comes back to the Commons on Monday.
'I've never met Theresa May and so I can't make a judgment. She's doing very well in the post, public opinion approves of what she is doing, and so I'm not going to get involved in a sort of tit-tat of personalities,' he said.
'My preoccupation has been from the very beginning that I believe that the referendum result is the most disastrous peacetime result that we've seen in this country.'
Mrs May's official spokesman today insisted: 'My understanding is that the Prime Minister has met Lord Heseltine. The idea that they've not met - I don't think that's right.'
The spokesman added: 'The Government has a clearly-stated, consistent position that the EU (Notification of Withdrawal) Bill should be passed without amendment. This bill has a simple purpose, to trigger Article 50.
'Lord Heseltine, who held a number of government advisory positions, voted against the official position of the Government. The Chief Whip in the House of Lords therefore asked him to stand down from those roles.
'The Government would like to warmly thank Lord Heseltine for his service.'

The peer led the fight for the amendment last night as he warned the final Brexit deal was 'totally unpredictable' and the referendum mandate was not unlimited.
He was later told Prime Minister Theresa May was firing him from his roles advising the Government on a number of areas, including its industrial strategy. 


The peer said he was sorry his expertise would no longer be used by the Government but insisted it was Parliament's duty to protect the country's legacy for future generations.
Speaking on the BBC's Today programme, Lord Heseltine said he had 'never met' Mrs May - although he praised her for 'doing well in the polls'.
He said he had been working 'three to four days a week' for the government for the past six years. But the peer insisted he had little choice but to follow his Europhile principles.
'The point comes in life when you have to do what you think is right,' Lord Heseltine said.


But Brexit supporters warned the amendment, which demands Parliament has the right to send Mrs May back to Brussels for a better deal, would damage the Government's ability to negotiate. 
Lord Forsyth, another ex-Cabinet minister, warned him not to challenge the authority of the Commons, which voted in favour of Article 50, telling him: 'It' s not the moment to grab the Mace'.
This was a reference to the famous moment in 1976 when Heseltine, then a shadow minister, seized the Commons regalia and waved it at the Labour benches after they celebrated a single-vote victory in controversial circumstances.
Michael Heseltine was the most prominent, controversial, outspoken and effective senior politician of the 1980s and 1990s who never became prime minister.
He was the darling of the Tory faithful - particularly the Conservative ladies - with his streaming golden locks and his passionate, over-the-top speeches at party conferences.
But he is best known for his role in toppling Margaret Thatcher from power, only cruelly to be denied the fulfilment of his searing ambition - to replace her in 10 Downing Street. He was the very-nearly-but-not-quite man of British politics.
The Thatcherites who live on in the Conservative Party never forgave him for engineering Mrs Thatcher's downfall.
The ambition to be prime minister never deserted him, although the heart attack he suffered in Venice in June 1993 effectively ended any lingering hope that he would get there.
In 2016 he again hit the headlines in a rather bizarre fashion - having to deny killing his mother's dog.
And in January he was fined £5,000 after knocking a cyclist off his bike.  
Mrs May will demand MPs overturn any changes to the Bill when it returns to the Commons on Monday.
The Prime Minister will hope her decisive action will discourage potential Tory rebel MPs. 
The legislation, which hands the Prime Minister power to start official Brexit talks, is expected to be law by the middle of next week regardless of defeat tonight.
After the vote, Mr Davis said: 'It is disappointing that the House of Lords has chosen to make further changes to a Bill that the Commons passed without amendment.
'It has a straightforward purpose - to enact the referendum result and allow the Government to get on with negotiating a new partnership with the EU.
'It is clear that some in the Lords would seek to frustrate that process, and it is the Government's intention to ensure that does not happen. We will now aim to overturn these amendments in the House of Commons.' 

In his speech, Lord Heseltine said he backed triggering Article 50 in response to the Brexit referendum.
And he praised the Prime Minister's handling of the post referendum period and the formation of her Government.
But of the referendum result, Lord Heseltine said: 'I do not accept that the mandate runs for all time and in all circumstances.
'The 48 per cent have the same right to be heard.' 
He went on: 'We now face a protracted period of negotiation. No-one has the first idea of what will emerge.
'No-one can even tell us what governments in Europe will be there to conclude whatever deal emerges.
'No-one can say with certainty how British public opinion will react to totally unpredictable events.'
The peer understood it would take 1,600 regulations to 'unravel over 40 years of closer union'.
He said: 'Everyone in this House knows that we now face the most momentous peacetime decision of our time.
'And this amendment secures in law the Government's commitment ... to ensure that Parliament is the ultimate custodian of our national sovereignty.
'It ensures that Parliament has the critical role in determining the future that we will bequeath to generations of young people.'

Leading Brexiteer Lord Lawson admitted the prospects of getting a deal within the two year Article 50 process were slim.
The former Chancellor said: 'No agreement is by far and away the most likely outcome.
'A bad agreement is all that is likely to be on offer.'
Moving the cross party amendment Lord Pannick - who represented Gina Miller in the Supreme Court case that forced the Bill to be brought - said: 'The purpose of this amendment is very simple.
The Lords finished its scrutiny on the Brexit Bill with its report and third reading stages last night.
The debate saw detailed discussion on a new set of amendments before a final vote on the principle of the legislation, which is about triggering Article 50.
The Government was defeated on EU nationals as well as on the call for a 'meaningful vote', so the BIll is returning to the Commons for further debate.
This is due to happen on Monday and MPs will spend about an hour discussing the Lords amendments.
If they reject them as planned, the Bill will 'ping pong' back to the Lords.
Peers are expected to then back down, meaning the legislation can be sent to the Queen for Royal Assent, making it law.  
'It is to ensure that at the end of the negotiating process the approval of Parliament is required for the terms of our withdrawal from the EU.'
He said the Prime Minister's commitment to such a vote should be written into the Bill 'no ifs and no buts'.
The Labour-led amendment, tabled with Lib Dem and crossbench support, also required the approval of both Houses if the Prime Minister decided that the UK should leave the EU without agreement on the terms.
Holding a second referendum on the final Brexit deal would add to the nation's divisions and 'deepen the bitterness', the Archbishop of Canterbury has warned.
The Most Rev Justin Welby said last June's vote on leaving the EU has exposed deep splits within society and stressed the need to find 'a level of national reconciliation'.
He also cautioned the Government against any temptation to 'oversimplify' the process, arguing it would be 'dangerous and unwise and wrong' to reduce the terms of divorce from Brussels 'to the result of a binary yes-no choice taken last summer'.
His intervention came on a Liberal Democrat amendment for a second poll tabled for the Brexit Bill. It was heavily defeated by peers.  
Alluding to differences of opinion within his own ranks over Brexit, the Archbishop said: 'On these benches we are not a party, nor do we follow a whip.
'We may dress the same but we have independent minds as anyone observing church politics recently will be well aware.'
He said: 'The referendum campaign and its aftermath revealed deep divisions in our societies.  

'(A second referendum) will add to our divisions, it will deepen the bitterness. It is not democratic. It is unwise.
'Even if circumstances change ... even if they change drastically, a dangerous and over-complicated process is the result of a referendum.' 

'It must be for Parliament to decide whether to prefer no deal or the deal offered by the EU,' Lord Pannick said.
Former Conservative leader Lord Howard said MPs would get a say on the deal no matter what course of action the Government took.
'The Commons will not only have its say, the Commons will have its way,' said Lord Howard. 

Mrs May's spokesman made clear there had been no change on the Prime Minister's position on the Brexit bill.
He said: 'She's been clear that she wants an unamended bill to pass. This is a simple bill with one purpose, to give the Government the power to trigger Article 50, that's where we are.'
Asked if the Government intended to trigger Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty by the end of this month he replied: 'Absolutely.'
Launching the demand for a second referendum, Lord Newby, Liberal Democrat leader in the Lords said: 'It would require any Brexit deal to be put to the people to approve or reject.
'It's based on the principle that having asked the people whether they wished to initiate the Brexit process, only the people should take the final decision.'
Lord Newby denied this amounted to 'sidelining' Parliament and warned of 'corrosive anger' if MPs and peers were to take the final decision going against the majority view at that time.
He said a second referendum would 'hardly impinge' on the Government's timetable for quitting the EU and suggested the question put to voters should be: 'Do you prefer the deal done by the Government or to remain within the EU.'
Challenged by Tory peers that this would provide no incentive for the EU to give the UK a good deal, Lord Newby said our European partners would negotiate in 'good faith' and branded such an 'unfriendly' view as 'deeply depressing'.
Lord Newby's amendment was heavily defeated by peers, ending prospects of a second referendum being added to the Bill. 
Archbishop of Canterbury Justin Welby urged peers to reject the demand, telling the Lords: 'Another referendum will add to our divisions - it will deepen the bitterness, it is not democratic, it is unwise.' 
The Archbishop said instead politicians must 'find a level of national reconciliation'. 
Labour former cabinet minister Lord Hain said Leave voters he spoke to during the referendum campaign 'were voting against something, they were voting against the European Union, but they were not voting in favour of anything'.
He added: 'The Leave campaign left the alternative deliberately ambiguous.'
Lord Hain went on: 'I am not disputing the outcome of June 23. This is not about re-running that referendum. This is about making sure that the democratic process remains democratic. That voters have a final say on the eventual negotiated outcome.'
Ex-Liberal Democrat Lord Carlile of Berriew, who now sits as a non-affiliated peer, said at the time of the EU referendum there had been no suggestion from his former party that there would be a further public vote.
He said: 'It was envisaged by Liberal Democrats that there would be one referendum.'
But his comments led to a dig from the party's former leader Lord Ashdown, who said his 'recall of what positions the Liberal Democrats took in the past has not always been entirely accurate'.
But Lord Carlile hit back, saying: 'He's at his best when he makes points with simplicity. That point was not made with simplicity.'
On Lord Ashdown's recollection, Lord Carlile suggested he had been 'too busy eating his hat', in a gibe at Lord Ashdown wrongly rejecting the shock election night exit poll in 2015, which predicted a Lib Dem bloodbath and disaster for the Labour Party.
Supporting a second vote, Tory peer Baroness Wheatcroft said: 'Although I am not an advocate of government by referendum, in this situation, having started the process with a referendum, it seems to me the only sensible way to bring the process to an end is to put the terms to the public.' 
Failure to deliver Brexit could irreparably 'tear the fabric' of society, Sajid Javid claimed on Friday night.
The Chancellor said even the disruption of No Deal would not be as bad as not leaving at all.
He also insisted that, despite the efforts of Remain MPs, No Deal was still 'very much on the table'.
In an interview with the Daily Mail on the eve of the Conservative Party conference, Mr Javid said: 'The best way to bring the country back together again and heal things is to deliver on that referendum.
'We can't have this debate going on. We've had the referendum, it was the biggest democratic exercise in the history of our country. And we have to honour it.
'It's a real test of the very fabric of our democracy. Our country, our democracy is a fabric that's been woven together over centuries, and made us what I think is one of the strongest democracies in the world.
'If we don't deal with this and exit on October 31, I just fear we tear that fabric in a way that we might not be able to stitch it up again.'
Mr Javid also:  
Mr Javid has been responsible for ramping up No Deal preparations, releasing an extra £4billion for departments since taking office in July. He said Britain would be 'ready' to leave the EU without a deal on October 31.
He said: 'I don't pretend for a second that there won't be challenges. There will be some disruptions here because we can't control what the EU do in No Deal ideal situation. Of course not.
'But we are putting in place many mechanisms and processes to handle No Deal and eventually, I also believe that we will come out and be stronger as a country once we've accepted the new.'
The Chancellor rounded on Opposition MPs for forcing through legislation designed to block No Deal, saying it 'does make it harder' to strike a withdrawal agreement with the Brussels bloc.
'This is not helpful,' he said. 'And I think the impression from the opposition is that they really don't want us to leave the EU at all, which is completely unacceptable.'
Mr Javid insisted the Prime Minister would still press ahead with the planned departure on October 31, regardless of whether a deal had been struck.
He said: 'With the legislation they are obviously trying to make No Deal less likely, but it is still very much on the table – and it is something that we are absolutely prepared to go down that road, if that's what it comes to.
'But, and I can't emphasise this enough, as a Government, we want a deal. There are active negotiations going on as we speak, and there is every reason to think we can still get a deal to put before Parliament. If we don't, we will leave without a deal.'
The Chancellor insisted his relationship with Mr Johnson was very strong, despite talk of tensions following the sacking of his aide.
He set up team-bonding sessions for advisers from No 10 and No 11 over a lasagne supper. And he said his dog Bailey had befriended the PM's new pet Dilyn, joking: 'Even our dogs are friends!'
His claim of a close relationship was strengthened last night when it emerged the Prime Minister has asked him to chair a committee on 'domestic priorities and delivery'.
Sources said the group would act as a 'star chamber' with ministers asked to present their plans for approval. But Mr Javid still said he was deeply uncomfortable with the decision to expel 21 Tory MPs for voting with Labour to frustrate No Deal.
He said the PM had 'a right' to discipline the group, which includes senior figures such as Philip Hammond, David Gauke and Rory Stewart.
But he added: 'These are people that I still consider my friends, they are good Conservatives. And I'd like to think there is a way back.'
He was also scathing about the sacking of his aide Sonia Khan, which was carried out without his consent. Miss Khan was frogmarched out of No 10 after Mr Cummings accused her of contacting allies of her former boss Mr Hammond.
Mr Javid, who took up the issue with the PM personally, said: 'Everyone agreed that it wasn't handled well.
'It was agreed that there be significant changes after that. And nothing like that can ever happen again.'
The Chancellor will today unveil a £16.6billion 'No Deal guarantee' to make up the shortfall in EU grants to businesses, universities and charities in the next few years.
The money includes £4.3billion for the coming year if Britain leaves the EU without a deal next month.
Mr Javid also insisted Islamic State bride Shamima Begum should remain banned from Britain, despite her claim that she now 'hates' the terror group. Miss Begum is challenging Mr Javid's decision as home secretary to strip her of her British citizenship.
In an interview with the Daily Mail this week, she said she was suffering mental health problems and wanted to come back to the UK from Syria, where she joined the murderous terror group as a 15-year-old runaway in 2015.
 
The boss of Aston Martin Lagonda has attacked ministers' Brexit strategy – and said a No Deal departure is better than more uncertainty.
Andy Palmer blasted the Government's attempt at negotiations, and broke with other car bosses by calling for the country to leave the European Union in October even if no agreement has been reached.
Palmer is bored of Brexit and told a crowd of car industry insiders in London: 'We think we know how we would cope with No Deal. We've planned for that. It's not great, we'd prefer it wasn't a No Deal.'
This stance is in stark contrast to other car firms with British operations, from Jaguar Land Rover to Nissan, insisting that No Deal would be disastrous.
The industry would be disproportionately disrupted by delays at borders or problems with customs, as it gets its parts delivered at the last minute in what is called a 'just-in-time' system.
Palmer slammed the Government for debating its negotiation strategy in public, which he said 'is not very bright', and said he was full of admiration for the way the EU has handled the negotiations.
He also poured scorn on hopes that driverless cars will be widely available in his lifetime, saying the expectation was 'absurd'. 
When asked if we will ever have autonomous cars that do not need humans on stand-by to operate, the 56-year-old said: 'Not in the way that is described - at least, not in my lifetime.'
He explained this is because it would require huge amounts of internet infrastructure to enable cars to receive instructions from the world around them, especially outside big cities.
The likes of Ford, General Motors, Tesla, Google and even Uber have been testing self-driving vehicle technology, the holy grail for the transport market.
Palmer also said a version of driverless technology that is currently in trial stages at a number of companies is 'reckless'.
This technology sees a car take over most driving but needs a passenger to intervene if the car requests it.
Palmer said: 'When it can't cope any more it hands back control to the driver. The problem is that the driver may well be distracted or asleep.'
At the same meeting, Aston Martin's chief planning officer Nikki Rimmington said it and Lagonda are prepared for the possibility that shared, driverless vehicles could be popular in future in cities.
The luxury car maker is working on an opulent electric vehicle – the Lagonda Vision Concept – which it hopes will incorporate lots of new driverless technologies.
A former Nissan executive, Palmer became chief executive of the James Bond car maker in October 2014.
He took the company on to the London Stock Exchange last year in a disastrous public float.
Its shares have tanked since they listed at 1900p – and now stand at almost half that level, at around 967p.
Separately, Palmer launched a damning attack on the way the Government picks and chooses new technologies to back.
He said it 'p****s him off' when ministers pick a new technology to champion.
Palmer said: 'I don't know how a politician that probably went to journalism school would have the faintest idea what the technology is going to be in 20 or 30 years - because I'm an engineer and I don't know.'
He also slammed the Government's regularly touted goal of becoming a leader in battery technology, which is crucial to electric cars and renewable energy. 
Palmer described this vision as 'nonsensical' when the Government has pledged to put much less money to fund research and development than other countries have.
 
With the Government releasing the first batch of its ‘no-deal’ impact assessments today, Brexit critics are gleefully anticipating dire headlines.
They have jumped on outlandish predictions for life after Brexit, from rioting and planes being grounded, to empty supermarket shelves and warnings that a no-deal Brexit would push food prices up by 12 per cent.
But what’s the truth? Here, ROSS CLARK analyses claims from proponents of the new Project Fear.
‘A NO-DEAL Brexit would raise food prices by 12 per cent,’ executives from Britain’s leading supermarkets warned the Treasury. 
REALITY: The claim is based on the assumption that the Government would adopt the same tariffs on food imports that the EU currently obliges Britain to levy on imports from outside the EU – which are as much as 44 per cent for cheese and 40 per cent for beef.
Yet after a no-deal Brexit, the UK will be able to set tariffs at whatever level it wants – including zero. 
Under World Trade Organisation (WTO) rules we wouldn’t be able to discriminate between countries we don’t have a free-trade agreement with – we would have to levy the same tariff on food from France as we do from, say, Brazil.
But there would be nothing to stop a post-Brexit Government reducing tariffs all round – actually cutting shop prices
‘UK would run out of food a year from now with no-deal Brexit, NFU warns’. 
REALITY: This headline appeared in the Remain-supporting Guardian this month, and the claim seems to be based on a figure released by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs that suggests Britain ‘only’ grows 60 per cent of what we eat.
Given that August 7 – when the report appeared – is 60 per cent of the way through the year, the National Farmers’ Union has decided that this is the date we would run out of food if all imports were suddenly cut off.
The 60 per cent figure for Britain’s self-sufficiency is real, but it is ridiculous to assert that all food supplies from abroad would be cut off in the event of no deal.
Why wouldn’t EU farmers and food producers want to export to Britain? And even if the EU were to ban all food exports to Britain – the odds of which are negligible – we could just import more food from non-EU countries.
Some 5 per cent of our food comes from Africa, 4 per cent each from North America, South America and Asia, 2 per cent from non-EU European countries and 1 per cent from Australasia, according to Defra.
Diabetics will have to go without insulin. 
REALITY: On July 30 Sir Michael Rawlins, chairman of the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency, claimed 3.5million UK diabetics – including the Prime Minister – would be at risk because ‘we make no insulin in the UK’ and what we import from the EU has to be temperature-controlled, meaning it could go off if there were delays at ports.
He had to clarify his remarks after it emerged that a factory in Wrexham produces insulin, and drugs firms that manufacture it in France and Denmark reassured diabetics contingency plans will ensure Britain will not run low. 
‘No-deal Brexit poses serious risk to public safety, say police leaders’. 
REALITY: In another scaremongering Guardian headline, the paper reported on a letter to the Home Secretary from the Association of Police and Crime Commissioners’ cross-party Brexit working group.
Police and crime commissioners are not to be confused with the police – they are in most cases locally elected politicians.
Their claim seems to be based on a speech made by the EU’s chief negotiator Michel Barnier in June in which he said British police would no longer have direct access to EU police databases or the European Arrest Warrant. Yet Mr Barnier also went to pains to say that it wouldn’t mean the end of co-operation nor extradition. In any case, the European Arrest Warrant is widely criticised, not least by shadow attorney general Baroness Chakrabarti. As director of Liberty in 2014, she raised the case of Andrew Symou, who was extradited to Greece on manslaughter charges despite ‘serious doubts about the reliability of evidence’. He was acquitted after spending ten months in jail. 
A disorderly Brexit will bring ‘civil unrest’. 
REALITY: This claim was apparently made by Doug Gurr, Amazon’s chief in the UK, at a private meeting with Brexit secretary Dominic Raab a month ago – although it is not clear exactly what he meant by civil unrest and what would trigger it.
Suffice to say that a decade ago Britain withstood the collapse of a bank followed by the deepest recession since the Thirties without civil unrest – so why Brexit should lead to it isn’t clear. 
‘Aeroplanes will be grounded’
REALITY: Chancellor Philip Hammond suggested this extreme scenario while answering questions from the Commons Select Committee on Business last November. For it to occur, however, it would mean the EU ejecting the UK from its ‘open-skies agreement’ – a single market for airlines allowing any majority European-owned airline to fly between EU airports – and refusing to set anything else up.
That is highly unlikely as, besides being unable to fly to Britain, European airlines would be unable to use British airspace which covers a vital area criss-crossed by many transatlantic flightpaths.
Another reason why planes would be grounded was given by Paul Everitt, chairman of ADS, a trade body for the UK aerospace industry. He claims that after a no-deal Brexit, planes with British-made parts might no longer be allowed to use EU airspace.
This is preposterous. It isn’t just UK airlines that use planes with British-made components – Rolls Royce makes a large proportion of the world’s commercial jet engines and Airbus, registered in Holland, makes wings in Wales. It would mean the EU having to ban planes taking off across Europe. 
‘M20 could be a giant lorry park for years’
REALITY: This is based on an impact assessment by Dover Council. Port officials said that if lorries were given customs checks lasting an average of two minutes it would cause 17-mile tailbacks.
We don’t know what customs arrangements will be in place after Brexit or if there will be any increase in checks. But the hysterical reporting ignores the fact that the traffic system already has to cope with substantial delays at the port.
In 2015, a stretch of the M20 was closed for 24 days as part of Operation Stack – which involved parking lorries on the motorway after a dock strike in Calais caused delays. The police now use Operation Brock, which keeps the road open by parking lorries on just one carriageway.
Even before the referendum, authorities were considering creating a permanent lorry park to cope with such delays.
‘Brexit has given us the slowest growing economy in the developed world’. 
REALITY: There was a blip in 2017 when the UK was the slowest-growing economy in the G7. But over the year as a whole, our economy grew by 1.8 per cent – faster than Japan (1.7 per cent) or Italy (1.6 per cent).
Last Friday, the latest GDP figures showed Britain was once more growing faster than the Eurozone – with growth of 0.4 per cent in the last quarter, compared with 0.3 per cent for the Eurozone.
Just this week, Britain recorded the lowest net borrowing for the period April to July in 16 years. 
Brexit ‘will break the NHS’ 
REALITY: False claims have been made that there is already a ‘Brexodus’ of NHS staff. While some EU nationals have left NHS jobs since the referendum, they have been more than outnumbered by EU nationals who have joined the NHS – in the first year following the Brexit vote there was a net increase of 3,000 EU nationals working in the NHS. 
What has worried some Remainers is a decrease in the number of nurses from other European Union countries during that 12-month period. However, that was more likely to have been the fault of over-stringent new language tests, which in some cases even caught out native English speakers from Australia.
Britain has nothing to fear from leaving the EU without a deal, leading Brexiteers declared last night.
After a weekend when Theresa May’s Chequers plan came under fire from Remainers and Leavers alike, a poll yesterday showed growing public support for walking away from the negotiations.
It found twice as many voters now back leaving the EU without a deal.
Senior Eurosceptic MPs said it was proof that the PM should accelerate contingency planning for a no-deal scenario.
Scroll down for video 
Remainers have long argued that the consequences of no deal would be catastrophic for the economy. But leading Brexiteers admitted yesterday that although it could be bumpy in the short term, Britain could thrive in the long run. Former Tory leader Iain Duncan Smith said: ‘If we don’t have a trade deal with the EU then we simply trade on World Trade Organisation terms, which is how most countries trade with each other.
‘It wouldn’t be bedlam. All this talk about crashing out with no deal – we’re not crashing, we’re moving to WTO rules, which is how all EU-US trade is governed at the moment.’
Former Cabinet minister Priti Patel said: ‘We should be free to forge new trade deals around the world and leave the protectionism of the EU. This is a positive thing we should be celebrating.’
The ComRes poll for the Daily Mirror found 39 per cent think the Prime Minister ‘should accept a no-deal and the UK simply leave the EU’. Just 20 per cent want her to press on with the White Paper, which critics say is a ‘half in, half out’ Brexit.
More than half of Tory voters (51 per cent) back no deal, compared to one in four (26 per cent) of Labour supporters.
A quarter of voters want the PM to ask for an extension to the March deadline for a deal.
John Longworth, of Leave Means Leave, and a former head of the British Chambers of Commerce, said: ‘There would be a little border disruption if we leave without a deal, but nothing like as bad as Remainers say it would be – and the upsides would be considerable.
‘We could free our economy from EU regulations and do huge free-trade deals with the US, Australia, New Zealand and Canada.’
MONEY
Leaving without a deal would mean an immediate Brexit on March 29 after tearing up a 21-month transition agreement. This included giving £39billion to the EU, which ministers would no longer have to pay, a House of Lords report claims.
GOODS TRADE
The Chequers agreement effectively proposed keeping Britain in the single market for goods and agriculture to preserve ‘frictionless’ trade and protect the economy.
Customs checks on cross-Channel freight would cause havoc at ports, hitting food supplies and other goods.
Even Brexiteers admit to a big economic impact in the short term. Britain could waive customs checks on EU produce to free up backlogs, but would Brussels do the same?
TARIFFS
All EU-UK trade in goods is free of tariffs in the single market.
Trade would revert to World Trade Organisation rules. The EU would charge import tariffs averaging 2-3 per cent on goods, but up to 60 per cent for some agricultural produce, damaging UK exporters.
We have a trade deficit with the EU of £71billion – they sell us more than we sell them – so the EU overall would lose out.
German cars and French agriculture would be worst hit, as would UK regions with large export industries. Tariffs could also mean price inflation. But UK trade with the EU is 13 per cent of GDP and falling compared to non-EU trade, which generates a surplus and is likely to grow. The outlook would be boosted by Britain’s ability to strike trade deals.
IMMIGRATION
The UK would immediately have control over its borders and freedom to set migration policy on all EU migrants.
UK nationals would likely lose their right to live and work in the EU. There would be legal uncertainty for the 1.3million Britons living in the EU and the 3.7million EU nationals here.
CITY OF LONDON
Many firms have already made contingency plans for no deal, but there would probably be a significant degree of disruption and an economic hit.
Ministers would be likely to take an axe to tax and regulations to preserve the UK’s economic advantage.
AEROPLANES
Fears of planes not being able to fly appear far-fetched – unless the EU is determined to destroy both business and tourism. Rules to keep planes in the air are likely to be agreed. The EU has many deals with non-EU countries as part of its Open Skies regime.
EUROPEAN COURTS
Britain would be free from the edicts of the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg and all EU laws. Parliament would be sovereign.
FARMING & FISHING
THE UK would quit the Common Agricultural Policy, which gives farmers and landowners £3billion in subsidies. Ministers would come under pressure to continue a form of subsidy.
NORTHERN IRELAND
Northern Ireland would be outside the EU, with no arrangements on how to manage 300 crossing points on the 310-mile border.
The EU would want Ireland to impose customs and other checks to protect the bloc’s border – something it has said it will not do. No deal could blow a hole in the Good Friday Agreement, with pressure on all sides to find a compromise.
 
Theresa May is set to snub Donald Trump at the G20 summit after he savaged her Brexit deal as 'great for the EU' - and warned it would hit trade with the US.
The PM's spokesman said there were 'no plans' to hold talks with the President at the gathering in Argentina following his dramatic intervention - which echoed the complaints of Brexiteers and threatened to kill off the package altogether.
As the government reeled from the blow, one minister highlighted a tweet claiming Mr Trump wanted to 'finish off' Mrs May, while Cabinet Office minister David Lidington said bluntly that he was 'wrong'.
Asked if Mrs May would try to explain the situation to Mr Trump at the summit on Friday and Saturday, the PM's spokesman said she would hold bilateral talks with other leaders, but had 'none planned' with the US commander-in-chief.  
'It is not something that we have requested,' the spokesman said. The Prime Minister's diary is agreed in advance and she is meeting with a number of world leaders to discuss issues like trade and security. 
'We have met with the president on a number of occasions in recent months and the bilaterals that are agreed for the G20 are done so in advance, and they don't include the US president.' 
But the PM received some warmer words after Japanese PM Shinzo Abe welcomed the progress she had made on the Brexit deal in a phone call with Mrs May today.
But No10, who had originally hoped Mr Abe would visit the UK before the crunch Brexit vote next month to boost the PM's PR blitz, confirmed he will now make the trip early next year.
Senior Tories and Eurosceptics have seized on the extraordinary barbs from the White House with glee - saying it could not be 'brushed off' and Mrs May must reopen negotiations with Brussels. Jacob Rees-Mogg said Mr Trump was stating an 'obvious' fact.
Speaking to reporters in Washington, Mr Trump jibed that the agreement was 'great' for the EU - an institution he has accused of being a protectionist cartel.
In a barb that struck at the heart of Mrs May's vision for the UK's future outside of the bloc, he added: 'I think we have to take a look seriously whether or not the UK is allowed to trade. 
'Because right now if you look at the deal, they may not be able to trade with us. And that wouldn't be a good thing. I don't think they meant that.'
The President said he hoped Mrs May would be able to address the problem. 'I don't think that the Prime Minister meant that,' he said. 'And, hopefully, she'll be able to do something about that.
'But, right now, as the deal stands she may not, they may not, be able to trade with the US. And, I don't think they want that at all.'
On a visit to a winter fair in mid-Wales today, Mrs May flatly dismissed Mr Trump's attack, saying the package thrashed out with Brussels was 'very clear we will have an independent trade policy'.
'If you look at the political declaration that sets out the future framework for our relationship with the European Union, it clearly identifies we will have an independent trade policy and we will be able to negotiate trade deals with countries around the rest of the world,' she said.
'As regards the United States, we have already been talking to them about the sort of agreement that we could have in the future. 
Theresa May passed a milestone in the Brexit process by agreeing a package with the EU. But there is still a long way to go.
This is what the next steps are: 
December 11: The meaningful vote itself. This is the absolutely crucial moment and could make or break the Prime Minister and her deal. MPs will vote after a debate that could last as long as five days. 
If the vote carries, Mrs May survives and Brexit is on track as she plans. If she loses, she could resign.  
December 13-14: The next EU summit. If the deal has been rejected by MPs, Mrs May could use this to try and secure new concessions. 
January 2019: The European Parliament is due to vote on the deal - but will only do so if it has been agreed in the House of Commons.
March 29, 2019: Exit day. This is written in law so unless there is a dramatic shift Britain will leave the EU, deal or no deal.  
'We have a working group set up and that is working very well, has met several times and is continuing to work with the US on this.' 
Number Ten said Mr Abe welcomed the divorce deal thrashed out with Brussels.
A Downing Street spokesman said: 'The leaders discussed the importance of free trade and close co-operation between the UK and Japan. 
'Prime Minister Abe welcomed the progress the Prime Minister has made to secure an agreement with the European Union.
'The leaders looked forward to seeing each other at the G20 in Argentina this weekend, and the Prime Minister welcomed Prime Minister Abe's commitment to visit the UK early next year.' 
The row came after Mrs May suffered another agonising day in Westminster, with MPs queuing up to expressing their anger at the mooted settlement with the EU.
She has challenged Jeremy Corbyn to a high-stakes TV debate on Brexit in a bid to turn the tide, and will try to get back on to the front foot today by visiting Wales and Northern Ireland to win public support.
However, defeat is looking near-inevitable in the looming Commons vote on the withdrawal agreement - now confirmed as happening on December 11.
There are suspicions that Mr Trump was influenced by his friend Nigel Farage, who is vehemently opposed to Mrs May's withdrawal agreement - although others point out the former Ukip leader is now mainly a TV and radio pundit.
A welter of Tory rebels pounced on Mr Trump's remarks to bolster their case. 
Mr Rees-Mogg told TalkRadio the president was right. 
'He has pointed something out that is obvious from reading the withdrawal agreement, that is we won't be able to make trade deals with other countries because we'll be bound into the EU customs union,' he said.
'This agreement, or proposal at this stage, limits the government's ability to trade with the rest of the world freely because we'll be tied into the inefficient, protectionist European system.' 
A particularly stinging assault came from former Cabinet minister Sir Michael Fallon, a long-term loyalist.
He said Mrs May's deal was 'the worst of all worlds' and warned it seems 'doomed'.
'It's no use us just brushing that off, saying 'no, no we can do a deal with America', he's the President of the United States, and if he says it's going to be difficult, then it certainly looks like it's going to be difficult.
'This is not a good deal and we need a better deal. If it's possible to get a better deal, to send the negotiators back to Brussels for two or three months, to postpone the actual leaving date for two or three months, I still think that in the long term that would be in the best interest of the country.
'We have to get this right.'
However, Sir Michael did give Downing Street a glimmer of hope by insisting he did not think Mrs May should stand down if she loses the vote next month.  
Tory backbencher Michael Fabricant, another MP who has refused to join the Eurosceptic coup attempt against Mrs May, tweeted: 'Trump is spot on. It's a great deal for the EU.'
Former sports minister Tracey Crouch has also come out against the pact, in a sign that moderate opinion in the party is swinging against the PM. 
But a No 10 spokesman said: 'The political declaration we have agreed with the EU is very clear we will have an independent trade policy so that the UK can sign trade deals with countries around the world — including the US.' 
Mr Lidington said Mr Trump's intervention was 'not unexpected', insisting the UK would be free to do trade deals around the world after Brexit. 
But he also seemed to pour cold water on the idea of a deep Transatlantic agreement, saying: 'I think it was always going to be challenging to do a deal with the United States.
'The United States is a tough negotiator, President Trump's always said very plainly 'I put America first'.
'Well, I'd expect the British Prime Minister to put British interests first, but it's going to be a very tough negotiation.' 
Digital minister Margot James retweeted a message from an FT journalist saying that Mr Trump is 'openly gunning for a no-deal Brexit' and wanted a 'populist like Boris Johnson or Jacob Rees-Mogg to finish off Theresa May'.    
Mrs May received a hostile reception last night as she told the House of Commons her Brexit deal 'delivers for the British people', and warned that rejecting it would put the UK on the path to division and uncertainty.
She was loudly barracked by MPs as she insisted that no better deal was available than the Withdrawal Agreement and Political Declaration on future relations endorsed by EU leaders in Brussels on Sunday.
Labour MPs were invited to attend a special briefing in the Commons with her chief of staff Gavin Barwell and Mr Lidington - but only around 20 bothered to turn up.
Tory MP and leading Brexiteer Jacob Rees-Mogg criticised the meeting, saying its 'smacks of desperation'.
But Mrs May has stayed resolute in the face of the verbal barrage, earlier telling MPs they had a 'duty' to listen to constituents and do 'what is in the national interest'.
She faced a barrage of attacks from all sides of the House- including from Tory big-hitters Boris Johnson, David Davis and Iain Duncan Smith. 
Tory MPs told their leader her deal is 'as dead as a dodo' and does not stand a chance of getting passed.
The DUP - whose ten MPs prop the Tories up in No10 - again condemned the backstop, while Jeremy Corbyn said the package pleased 'nobody'.
Even previous loyalists such as ex-Cabinet minister Sir Michael Fallon joined in the criticism. 
Extraordinarily, it took over an hour of brutal attacks from across the chamber before the first MP - Nicky Morgan - spoke in defence of Mrs May. 
At one point during the battering, Mrs May ruefully remarked to Conservative Remainer Anna Soubry that she barely seemed to have achieved one task that people claimed was 'impossible' before they were demanding she completed another one. 
Gibraltar will 'always be under the Union flag', Gavin Williamson has said, amid concerns over the impact of Brexit.
The Defence Secretary was asked by his Labour counterpart Nia Griffith whether Gibraltar's future was British, even after Brexit, following push back from Spain linked to trade.
Speaking during a debate on the RAF centenary, Ms Griffith said: 'I've been trying extremely hard not to mention the B-word but given the events of the weekend he will be only too aware of the unique importance of Gibraltar, so can he give us absolute assurances its status is not under threat?'
Mr Williamson replied: 'I can give her absolutely categorical reassurance Gibraltar is never under threat.
'Ever since the Royal Marines seized it all those centuries ago, it will always be under the Union flag long into the future so do rest assured we will always look after Gibraltar.'
Mr Williamson also told the debate that Parliament's decision to create the RAF in 1918 as 'one of its finest moments'.
He said: 'The Royal Air Force continuously stands vigilant in terms of protecting our skies here in the United Kingdom, but also they're taking our fight to our enemies abroad.
'Whether that is Daesh in Iraq and Syria, the RAF has been bringing its skills to be able to strike and eliminate that threat combining precision guarded weaponry with unparalleled surveillance intelligence gathering and surveillance capabilities, flying at the highest operational tempo for over a quarter of a century and striking more than 1,750 times.'
He added: 'Sometimes people in this country think that the campaigns that the RAF are fighting are campaigns that are very far away from here and maybe don't have the relevance to the United Kingdom, but actually by dealing with that threat in Iraq and Syria what they're doing is keeping the streets of Great Britain safer by dealing with that threat there.'
Mr Williamson later revealed that he was 'desperate' to see Second World War drama Hurricane, which tells the true of an RAF unit manned mostly by Polish pilots.
He said: 'I'm slightly desperate to see the film Hurricane and I'm not sure if any members of this House have had the opportunity to do so but I was trying to persuade my wife to come with me to the cinema but she wasn't convinced of it but I'm looking forward to it coming on release to DVD.' 
The mauling underlines the massive task facing the PM, as she stares down the barrel of almost certain disaster in the House next month.
Just a handful of Tory MPs stood up to defend the deal, but in the marathon Commons session their voices were lost in a sea of criticism.
It came after Mrs May told the Cabinet that the breakthrough in Brussels meant the doubters had been 'proved wrong'. 
Here are some of the damning interjections from MPs which show the sheer level of fury at Theresa May's Brexit deal:  
Jeremy Corbyn, Labour leader:  
'This botched deal is still a bad deal for the Country and all yesterday did was mark the end of this governments failed and miserable negotiations.' 
Sir Michael Fallon, ex Defence Secretary:
'Nobody can doubt that the Prime Minister has tried her very best, are we not nonetheless being asked to take a huge gamble here?'
Iain Duncan-Smith, ex Tory leader
'Does she recognise the genuine and real concern held on all sides of the House about what would happen if the UK was to be forced into the backstop?'
Boris Johnson, ex Foreign Secretary 
'It's very hard to see how this deal can provide certainty to business or anyone else when you have half the Cabinet going around reassuring business that the UK is effectively going to remain in the customs union and in the single market, and the Prime Minister herself continuing to say that we are going to take back control of our laws, vary our tariffs and do as she said just now, real free trade deals. 
'They can't both be right. Which is it?'
Sammy Wilson , DUP MP: 
'Does the Prime Minister not recognise that by signing this legally binding agreement she is handing the EU a cudgel, which it will use to mug us for a second time when it comes to negotiations on the future trade arrangements?'
David Davis, ex Brexit Secretary 
 'If the EU really intends in good faith to rapidly negotiate a future trade agreement why can we not make the second half of the £39 billion conditional on delivering it?'
Mark Francois, Tory MP
'The Prime Minister and the whole House knows the mathematics - this will never get through, and even if it did, which it won't, the DUP - on whom we rely for a majority - have said they would then review the confidence and supply agreement, so it's as dead as a dodo. 
 Ian Blackford, SNP Westminster leader 
'Scottish fishing communities have been duped once again by the Conservatives.
'We cannot accept this sellout from the Conservatives.
Ross Thomson, Tory MP
'The Northern Ireland backstop would leave Northern Ireland a separate regulatory regime...It could threaten the break up of our precious United Kingdom.' 
Anna Soubry, Remain-backing Tory MP   
'As it currently stands, the majority of people in this House will not vote in favour of the Prime Minister's deal, despite her very best efforts, so she needs Plan B.' 
 
But Brexiteer Cabinet ministers are still deeply unhappy with package - with Andrea Leadsom and Penny Mordaunt among those on 'resignation watch'. 
They have remained stubbornly silent while other colleagues voiced support for the deal.
Other ministers are said to have formed an alliance to push for a Norway-style relationship with the EU if Mrs May's deal falls in the face of massive opposition from scores of Tories, Labour, the SNP and Lib Dems.
Even supportive ministers are in despair at the situation, with one senior source telling MailOnline they feared the Tories were about to experience a 'nuclear meltdown' that could rip the party to shreds. 
Despite the deepening woes, No10 said the Cabinet 'congratulated' the PM and 'thanked her for all her hard work on securing a deal'.
In her Commons statement, the PM said: 'Our duty as a Parliament over these coming weeks is to examine this deal in detail, to debate it respectfully, to listen to our constituents and decide what is in our national interest.
'There is a choice which MPs will have to make. We can back this deal, deliver on the vote of the referendum and move on to building a brighter future of opportunity and prosperity for all our people.
'Or this House can choose to reject this deal and go back to square one ... It would open the door to more division and more uncertainty, with all the risks that will entail.'
She insisted that 'the national interest is clear' and 'the British people want us to get on with a deal that honours the referendum'.
Mrs May admitted some MPs were deeply concerned about the Irish border backstop. 
But she insisted it was an insurance policy that 'no-one wants to use'. 
Sir Michael Fallon, previously among the most loyal of Tory MPs, said: 'Nobody can doubt that the Prime Minister has tried her very best, are we not nonetheless being asked to take a huge gamble here?
'Paying, leaving, surrendering our vote and our veto without any firm commitment to frictionless trade or the absolute right to dismantle external tariffs.
'Is it really wise to trust the future of our economy to a pledge simply to use best endeavours?'
Mrs May responded saying that it was not possible to sign a legally binding free trade agreement with the European Union until the UK had left the EU. 
Tory former foreign secretary Boris Johnson said: 'It's very hard to see how this deal can provide certainty to business or anyone else when you have half the Cabinet going around reassuring business that the UK is effectively going to remain in the customs union and in the single market, and the Prime Minister herself continuing to say that we are going to take back control of our laws, vary our tariffs and do as she said just now, real free trade deals. 
'They can't both be right. Which is it?' 
Conservative former leader Mr Duncan Smith raised questions over the backstop arrangement, asking the Prime Minister: 'Does she recognise the genuine and real concern held on all sides of the House about what would happen if the UK was to be forced into the backstop?'
Mr Duncan Smith said the PM had recognised the UK and EU do not want the backstop arrangement before citing Ireland's desire to avoid a hard border.
He added: 'It makes you wonder why is it in the Withdrawal Agreement at all?'
Tory MP Mark Francois, blasted the deal - and the PM's hopes of getting it through Parliament.
He said: 'The Prime Minister and the whole House knows the mathematics - this will never get through, and even if it did, which it won't, the DUP - on whom we rely for a majority - have said they would then review the confidence and supply agreement, so it's as dead as a dodo. 
Remainer Conservative Anna Soubry asked the Prime Minister to give the Commons a plan B as her Brexit deal would be voted down.
She said: 'As it currently stands, the majority of people in this House will not vote in favour of the Prime Minister's deal, despite her very best efforts, so she needs Plan B.
'What is the Prime Minister's Plan B - is it Norway, plus the single market, the customs union, which some of us have been arguing for over two years?'
As she faces the Commons battering, Mrs May joked: 'I'm tempted to say to her that throughout the last 18 months of these negotiations at virtually every stage people have said to me it wasn't possible for me to negotiate a deal with the EU - No sooner do I then people are saying 'well what's the next thing you're going to negotiate'.'
Struggling to defend her deal, Mrs May insisted that 'both the UK and the EU are fully committed to having our future relationship in place by 1st January 2021'.
'And the Withdrawal Agreement has a legal duty on both sides to use best endeavours to avoid the backstop ever coming into force. 
'If, despite this, the future relationship is not ready by the end of 2020, we would not be forced to use the backstop. We would have a clear choice between the backstop or a short extension to the Implementation Period.
'If we did choose the backstop, the legal text is clear that it should be temporary and that the Article 50 legal base cannot provide for a permanent relationship.'
Mrs May added: 'Furthermore, as a result of the changes we have negotiated, the legal text is now also clear that once the backstop has been superseded, it shall 'cease to apply'.
'So if a future Parliament decided to then move from an initially deep trade relationship to a looser one, the backstop could not return. I do not pretend that either we or the EU are entirely happy with these arrangements. And that's how it must be - were either party entirely happy, that party would have no incentive to move on to the future relationship.
'But there is no alternative deal that honours our commitments to Northern Ireland which does not involve this insurance policy. And the EU would not have agreed any future partnership without it. Put simply, there is no deal that comes without a backstop, and without a backstop there is no deal.' 
But senior Brexiteers ridiculed her chances of getting the package through parliament - saying it was already 'dead'.
More than 90 Tories have publicly committed to opposing the deal, and one jibed that the whips 'don't have enough thumbscrews' to turn the tide.
Another MP pointed out that at least two whips were likely to vote against.  

Theresa May's task of getting her Brexit deal past the House of Commons is looking near-impossible as opposition mounts.
The 'meaningful vote' promised to MPs will happen on December 11 and is the single biggest hurdle to the Brexit deal happening - as well as being the key to Mrs May' fate as PM.
But despite opinion polls suggesting the public might be coming round to her deal, there is little sign of a shift among politicians.
Remainers have been stepping up calls for a second referendum in the wake of Sam Gyimah's resignation as universities minister over the weekend - while Brexiteers including Boris Johnson have accused Mrs May of betrayal.   
Mrs May needs at least 318 votes in the Commons if all 650 MPs turns up - but can probably only be confident of around 230 votes.
The number is less than half because the four Speakers, 7 Sinn Fein MPs and four tellers will not take part.
The situation looks grim for Mrs May and her whips: now the deal has been published, over 100 of her own MPs and the 10 DUP MPs have publicly stated they will join the Opposition parties in voting No.
This means the PM could have as few as 225 votes in her corner - leaving 410 votes on the other side, a landslide majority 185.
This is how the House of Commons might break down:
Mrs May needs at least 318 votes in the Commons if all 650 MPs turns up - but can probably only be confident of around 230 votes.
The Government (plus various hangers-on)
Who are they: All members of the Government are the so-called 'payroll' vote and are obliged to follow the whips orders or resign. It includes the Cabinet, all junior ministers, the whips and unpaid parliamentary aides.
There are also a dozen Tory party 'vice-chairs and 17 MPs appointed by the PM to be 'trade envoys'.
How many of them are there? 178.
What do they want? For the Prime Minister to survive, get her deal and reach exit day with the minimum of fuss.
Many junior ministers want promotion while many of the Cabinet want to be in a position to take the top job when Mrs May goes.
How will they vote? With the Prime Minister.
European Research Group Brexiteers demanding a No Confidence Vote
Who are they: The most hard line of the Brexiteers, they launched a coup against Mrs May after seeing the divorce. Led by Jacob Rees-Mogg and Steve Baker.
How many of them are there: 26
What do they want: The removal of Mrs May and a 'proper Brexit'. Probably no deal now, with hopes for a Canada-style deal later.
How will they vote: Against the Prime Minister.
Other Brexiteers in the ERG
Who are they: There is a large block of Brexiteer Tory MPs who hate the deal but have so far stopped short of moving to remove Mrs May - believing that can destroy the deal instead. They include ex Tory leader Iain Duncan Smith and ex minister Owen Paterson.
Ex ministers like Boris Johnson and David Davis are also in this group - they probably want to replace Mrs May but have not publicly moved against her.
How many of them are there? Around 50.
What do they want? The ERG has said Mrs May should abandon her plans for a unique trade deal and instead negotiate a 'Canada plus plus plus' deal.
This is based on a trade deal signed between the EU and Canada in August 2014 that eliminated 98 per cent of tariffs and taxes charged on goods shipped across the Atlantic.
The EU has long said it would be happy to do a deal based on Canada - but warn it would only work for Great Britain and not Northern Ireland.
How will they vote: Against the Prime Minister.
Remain including the People's Vote supporters
Who are they: Tory MPs who believe the deal is just not good enough for Britain. They include the group of unrepentant Remainers who want a new referendum like Anna Soubry and ex-ministers who quit over the deal including Jo Johnson and Phillip Lee.
How many of them are there: Maybe around 10.
What do they want? To stop Brexit. Some want a new referendum, some think Parliament should step up and say no.
A new referendum would take about six months from start to finish and they group wants Remain as an option on the ballot paper, probably with Mrs May's deal as the alternative.
How will they vote? Against the Prime Minister.
Moderates in the Brexit Delivery Group (BDG) and other Loyalists
Who are they? A newer group, the BDG counts members from across the Brexit divide inside the Tory Party. It includes former minister Nick Boles and MPs including Remainer Simon Hart and Brexiteer Andrew Percy.
There are also lots of unaligned Tory MPs who are desperate to talk about anything else.
How many of them are there? Based on public declarations, about 48 MPs have either said nothing or backed the deal.
What do they want? The BDG prioritises delivering on Brexit and getting to exit day on March 29, 2019, without destroying the Tory Party or the Government. If the PM gets a deal the group will probably vote for it.
It is less interested in the exact form of the deal but many in it have said Mrs May's Chequers plan will not work.
Mr Boles has set out a proposal for Britain to stay in the European Economic Area (EEA) until a free trade deal be negotiated - effectively to leave the EU but stay in close orbit as a member of the single market.
How will they vote? With the Prime Minister.
The DUP
Who are they? The Northern Ireland Party signed up to a 'confidence and supply' agreement with the Conservative Party to prop up the Government.
They are Unionist and say Brexit is good but must not carve Northern Ireland out of the Union.
How many of them are there? 10.
What do they want? A Brexit deal that protects Northern Ireland inside the UK.
How will they vote? Against the Prime Minister on the grounds they believe the deal breaches the red line of a border in the Irish Sea.
Labour Loyalists
Who are they? Labour MPs who are loyal to Jeremy Corbyn and willing to follow his whipping orders.
How many of them are there? Up to 250 MPs depending on exactly what Mr Corbyn orders them to do.
What do they want? Labour policy is to demand a general election and if the Government refuses, 'all options are on the table', including a second referendum.
Labour insists it wants a 'jobs first Brexit' that includes a permanent customs union with the EU. It says it is ready to restart negotiations with the EU with a short extension to the Article 50 process.
The party says Mrs May's deal fails its six tests for being acceptable.
How will they vote? Against the Prime Minister's current deal.
Labour Rebels
Who are they? A mix of MPs totally opposed to Mr Corbyn's leadership, some Labour Leave supporters who want a deal and some MPs who think any deal will do at this point.
How many of them are there? Maybe 10 to 20 MPs but this group is diminishing fast - at least for the first vote on the deal.
What do they want? An orderly Brexit and to spite Mr Corbyn.
How will they vote? With the Prime Minister.
Other Opposition parties
Who are they? The SNP, Liberal Democrats, Plaid Cymru, Green Caroline Lucas and assorted independents.
How many of them are there? About 60 MPs.
How will they vote? Mostly against the Prime Minister - though two of the independents are suspended Tories and two are Brexiteer former Labour MPs. 
At least there was one point on which Remainer and Brexiteer could agree last night. This was a very British farewell.
Here in a jam-packed Parliament Square, there were no hysterics, no tears – and no pyrotechnics, either.
Yet there was no downplaying the enormity of the moment – fireworks or no fireworks – as the original helmsman of Brexit, Nigel Farage, steered his life's project across the finish line before leading thousands of his true believers in the National Anthem.
After all the polarised nastiness of the past three years, Britain's departure from the European Union was for the most part good-natured and magnanimous, if tinged with a sense of weariness.
Moments earlier, as the 11pm quitting hour drew near, the beaming Brexit Party leader had quoted the words of former Labour prime minister Tony Blair earlier in the day. 'Tony Blair has said today there's no point looking back!' said Mr Farage, to big applause. 'How about that? A crowd of Brexiteers cheering Tony Blair!'
He then delivered a ringing endorsement of the Prime Minister: 'I believe we have, in Boris Johnson, a Conservative prime minister who is saying all of the right things. Our hopes and our trust are now bound up with what Boris Johnson does.'
And with that, he began the countdown to 'the greatest moment in the modern history of our great nation'. All across the UK, there were scattered celebrations and wakes taking place last night, including a series of 'Leave A Light On For Scotland' candlelit vigils north of the border and two Brexit rallies in central London.
Yet no one was exactly swinging from the chandeliers. Even among the ultras of the Leave brigade, gathered in Parliament Square last night, the mood was more one of boisterous pride than delirium. For some of the older members of the crowd, this was the culmination of almost half a century's political activism.
Yet most seemed content just to sing Rule Britannia and wave a flag rather than bang on about WTO rules and free trade agreements. As for all those diehard Remainers, who once besieged this place daily draped in EU flags, I saw just one yesterday. He did not stay long.
Shortly before the big moment, Mr Johnson delivered a folksy fireside television message to the nation from Downing Street. 'This is not an end but a beginning,' he said, channelling the post-Alamein words of his hero Winston Churchill. 'This is the moment when the dawn breaks and the curtain goes up on a new act in our great national drama.'
There was, it must be said, a certain crack-of-dawn look to the PM's hair. Though this was surely an occasion for the Downing Street comb, it had clearly been mislaid.
Not that many people will have noticed. Neither the BBC nor ITV chose to broadcast his message live and no one was watching it in Parliament Square.
Mr Farage and his Brexit battalions had been left to bring their own portable stage on the back of a truck and they were having a sing-song while the PM was trying to address the nation. Cometh the moment, there was not a squeak from Big Ben, still shrouded in scaffolding. Instead, a recording of the Westminster chimes was played through Mr Farage's public address system on the stroke of 11.
For real bongs, we had to turn to Tony Appleton, 80, the town crier of Chelmsford, who had come with a big brass bell. There was plenty of cheering from the Brexiteers in the square, of course, but the mood was more restrained beyond. The Government had settled for understated patriotism, commissioning a red, white and blue light show for Downing Street and the buildings along Whitehall plus Union flags on every flagpole, including those along The Mall.
There were certainly none of the elaborate stunts we saw when a previous Conservative government took Britain into Europe.
Contrast last night's event to the great hullabaloo when we joined the European Economic Community at one minute past midnight on January 1, 1973.
Back then, a special Whitehall unit had spent more than a year planning a series of national celebrations under the banner of 'Fanfare For Europe'.
The festivities ran for days on end either side of the magic moment. There was a Fanfare For Europe football match at Wembley between the existing EEC nations and the newcomers (the UK, Ireland and Denmark – who won 2-0).
The Queen and other members of the Royal Family turned out at the Royal Opera House for a Fanfare For Europe gala evening, including readings by Laurence Olivier and Judi Dench.
Last night, while the Prime Minister held a modest drinks party inside Downing Street, a number of private Brexit parties were underway across the capital.
Among the most sought-after invitations was the 'Britain Leaving The European Union' dinner at 5 Hertford Street, the private members' club in Mayfair.
Here more than 100 leading lights of the Leave movement, including Sir Iain Duncan Smith, Bill Cash and Sir Bernard Jenkin, heard Churchill's biographer Andrew Roberts put the moment in context: 'I've heard many things described as 'historic' – football matches, TV programmes, even a speech by Theresa May. But, as an historian, I can guarantee and certify for you that Brexit night truly is historic.'
So much for the plague of locusts we had once been promised come this day. Remember all those predictions of food and drug shortages? Back in December 2018, Kent County Council was even warning that 'dead bodies may remain uncollected' unless Britain opted for a soft Brexit.
Next came dark talk of gridlock across the South East. Best of all was last October's warning by an unnamed minister of an epidemic of 'dogging' along the M20 by bored lorry drivers trapped in lay-bys for days on end.
When I checked in with Kent Police last night, their chief concern was a spate of thefts in the Tonbridge area. And the only thing threatening the smooth flow of traffic through Dover docks? England rugby fans heading for tomorrow's big game in Paris.
 
 
Emmanuel Macron last night warned Theresa May that he stood firmly behind EU negotiators as he refused to break ranks over Brexit.
The Prime Minister cut her holiday short to set out her Chequers plan to the French president at his Riviera retreat yesterday.
She warned him that Brussels faces a choice of a ‘Chequers deal or no deal’ as they held talks at Fort Bregancon. Downing Street wanted to use the meeting to win over Mr Macron, who is seen as one of the biggest obstacles to getting an agreement.
British officials are seeking to persuade France and Germany to order the European Commission’s chief negotiator Michel Barnier to soften his hardline stance. But the Elysee Palace refused to give a public account of the meeting as they sought to demonstrate that negotiations can only take place in Brussels.
A source signalled the French president was closely aligned with Mr Barnier, adding: ‘There is absolutely no intention to speak in place of Monsieur Barnier.’
Mrs May is the first foreign leader to visit Mr Macron at Fort Bregancon, the Mediterranean island-fortress that has served as the summer retreat for French presidents since 1968.
She was accompanied by her chief-of-staff Gavin Barwell, her Europe adviser Olly Robbins and British ambassador to France Ed Llewellyn, who worked as David Cameron’s chief-of-staff in Downing Street. 
After the formal talks, Mrs May and her husband Philip joined the president and his wife Brigitte for a private five-course dinner overlooking the sea. The foursome enjoyed a menu that included tomatoes and saffron-flavoured langoustines, thyme-flavoured sea bass, chicken and dark chocolate creme brûlée.
Once a base from which to repel pirates from North Africa who plagued the Mediterranean, Fort Bregancon was later used as a stronghold by Napoleon during the French Revolution. It remained a military fortress until shortly after the First World War, when it had a small garrison. Before heading to the South of France, Mrs May spoke by telephone with European Commission president Jean-Claude Juncker. Mrs May’s visit comes as part of a major diplomatic push that has seen both Foreign Secretary Jeremy Hunt and Brexit Secretary Dominic Raab travel to France in the past few days to make the case for a softening of attitude.
In an interview before travelling to Paris, Mr Hunt said: ‘France and Germany have to send a strong signal to the Commission that we need to negotiate a pragmatic and sensible outcome that protects jobs on both sides of the Channel.’ France is seen as taking a particularly hard line in the Brexit negotiations, especially on financial services, with Paris expecting to snatch around 3,500 banking jobs from the City.
A source in Mr Macron’s office yesterday said the EU’s chief negotiator Mr Barnier has maintained that any Brexit deal ‘must conform with the economic interests of the 27 remaining EU members, and the president has always supported this as well.’
Mrs May ended her break in the Italian Lakes a day early to travel to France, although she will jet off to Switzerland for a second break later this month. The UK’s former ambassador to France yesterday warned the Prime Minister not to expect a Brexit breakthrough in the talks. Lord Ricketts said Mr Macron was ‘the last person’ to want to break ranks with the rest of the European Union to push for a softer stance from Brussels.
Mr Macron ‘doesn’t believe in softening’ the position on Brexit as ‘he is a passionate pro-European’, the peer said.     
Perched 35 metres above sea level on a small island off the French Mediterranean coast, Fort de Bregancon has been the official retreat of the president of France since 1968.
But the history of Fort de Bregancon stretches back centuries - with the site even attracting the attention of Napoleon Bonaparte.
According to the president's official website, Napoleon became interested in the fort shortly after taking nearby Toulon during the French Revolution in 1793.
Making it his mission to repair and improve it, he endowed it with an imposing artillery.
It remained a military fortress throughout the First World War, and was occupied by a small garrison, before being decommissioned in 1919.
By the 1960s, the fort had fallen into disrepair - but was resurrected and restored to its former glory by a former French senator.
It passed to the state's possession in 1963, and was visited by Charles de Gaulle the following year when he presided over the 20th anniversary of the Allied landings in Provence.
According to reports, de Gaulle was not a fan of the fort and left after a single night.
Since then, the spectacular hideaway has been visited by every French president as a private escape from the demands of the day job.
It is not immune to the prying eyes of the paparazzi however, with former presidents Jacques Chirac, Nicolas Sarkozy and Francois Hollande all snapped at the fort.
Earlier this year, it was revealed that current president Macron had ordered a swimming pool to be built in the grounds.
The fort is said to be accessible by just one road, and comes with its own beach.
 
Emmanuel Macron is leading European efforts to stop Britain from getting any new delay to Brexit without a 'clear and credible' plan for leaving, saying we should otherwise be left to quit 'in a disorderly manner'.
Paris today attacked both Theresa May's plea to postpone leaving until June 30 and a separate plan from European Council president Donald Tusk to keep us in the trade bloc for a year.
A French diplomatic source said Mr Tusk's idea for a 'flextension' until March 29 2020 was 'a clumsy trial balloon' ahead of an emergency summit next Wednesday.
And European affairs minister Amélie de Montchalin warned that Theresa May's desire for a short extension of Article 50 with a break mechanism to leave sooner if a Withdrawal Agreement passed through Parliament was not likely to succeed.
'The European council took a clear decision on 21 March … Another extension requires the UK to put forward a plan with clear and credible political backing,' she told the Guardian.
'The council would then define the necessary conditions attached to that extension, she said.
'In the absence of such a plan, we would have to acknowledge that the UK chose to leave the EU in a disorderly manner.'
The French intransigence came as senior Dutch and German politicians also questioned Mrs may's request for a delay to June - after a similar request was rejected out at the last summit in March and two shorter ones imposed.
Dutch premier Mark Rutte said May's letter seeking the extension 'raises many questions' and there will have to be 'intense discussions' ahead of a crucial summit of European leaders next Wednesday that will decide on the issue.
'The plan was that the British would explain what they wanted from the EU,' Rutte told a weekly press conference.
'A letter was sent today which, as far as I am concerned, doesn't answer this request (from the EU for more information). I hope it will be possible to give the answers to these questions.'
Rutte - who has been one of the most outspoken EU leaders on Brexit as his country faces the risk of an economic shock if Britain leaves without a deal - said the letter had 'no full plan, there was only part of a plan.'
'We hope London will provide more clarity before Wednesday,'
German foreign minister Heiki Mass added that 'many questions' remained about Mrs May's plan.
The hardline continental approach to next week's summit came as meetings between the Tories and Labour to try to find a Brexit compromise appeared to have stalled tonight.
After a third day of talks Shadow Brexit secretary Sir Keir Starmer said: 'So far, the Government isn't proposing any changes to the deal.'
One of Jeremy Corbyn's senior aides today joked that three days of Brexit talks with the Tories had only produced a single piece of paper - as Jeremy Hunt warned Britain would have 'no choice' but to accept a long Brexit delay if Labour won't do a deal.
Brexiteers have pledged to 'go nuclear' and accused Theresa May of 'abandoning' her party - and leave voters - after she wrote to the EU begging them to extend Article 50 until June 30. 
There is also fury that she promised Brussels that British taxpayers would stump up £108million to hold European elections in late May if she fails to make a deal with Jeremy Corbyn by then.
Senior Labour and Conservative MPs are meeting for the third day in a row to thrash out a Brexit deal with a customs union and a second referendum being discussed as a compromise.
But ominously Labour's chief whip Nick Brown described the outcome of the crunch talks had produced 'a piece of paper' - but refused to say what the A4 sheet contained.
Mr Corbyn also admitted that talks with the Prime Minister could drag on after admitting he had 'no issue' with Britain taking part in the European elections.
Foreign Secretary Jeremy Hunt said today there 'no choice' but to accept a long extension if a way through cannot be found.
He told the BBC: 'It's obviously not optimal to have any extension at all and we have a plan to leave the EU and deliver on the referendum result which we put before Parliament a number of times.
'We still hope to leave the EU in the next couple of months, that's our ambition, we don't have a majority in Parliament and that means that we have to have these discussions with Jeremy Corbyn to see if there is enough common ground to do that.'
Asked if he could accept a long extension, Mr Hunt said: 'If we can't find a way through with Parliament then we have no choice'. 
This morning the Prime Minister sent a letter to EU chief Donald Tusk to formally request an extension to Article 50 that will delay the UK's departure beyond April 12 to June 30. 
Elections to the European Parliament take place every five years. 
The last election in 2014 cost £108million to hold and it is expected it will cost a similar amount to the taxpayer this time around if we take part. 
The £108million cost includes funding for things like hiring polling stations and the staff to run them, getting the ballot papers printed and producing promotional material highlighting that the elections are taking place.
It does not include the cost of MEPs' salaries. 
The UK currently returns 73 MEPs from 12 electoral regions to a parliament with 751 members that sits alternately in Brussels and Strasbourg.
The system used to pick MEPs is different from that used for Westminster elections, where you vote for one candidate who represents a specific constituency'.
Instead several forms of proportional representation are used, so between three and 10 MEPs are picked in each of the 12 UK regions and represent every one of the people in them. 
At the moment the UK's 73 MEPs consist of 19 Labour, 18 Tory, ten independents, seven Ukip, seven Brexit Party, three Greens, two SNP and one each for the Lib Dems, Ulster Unionists, Democratic Unionist Party, Sinn Fein, Plaid Cymru and the Social Democratic Party. 
There is also one vacant seat.
Donald Tusk said today that a 12-month 'flextension' to March 31 2020 is 'the only reasonable way out' of the crisis and will urge leaders of the EU's 27 member states to back him later today. 
Mrs May wants a 'termination clause' allowing the UK to leave on May 22 - the day before European elections - if a deal can be pushed through the UK Parliament. 
But Mrs May's letter admits that if she fails Britain would go to the polls between May 23 and May 26, costing the taxpayer up to £108million to put on the elections. British MEPs would then be paid a £85,000-a-year salary to sit in Brussels from July as the UK tries to leave. 
Brexiteer Owen Paterson tweeted that Tories should 'go nuclear' and push again for No Deal while Tory ERG chairman Jacob Rees-Mogg said today: 'If a long extension leaves us stuck in the EU we should be as difficult as possible. We could veto any increase in the budget, obstruct the putative EU army and block Mr Macron's integrationist schemes'. 
He added that if the PM agrees to a customs union: 'The Conservative Party is being abandoned'.
After Jacob Rees-Mogg warned that the UK 'should be as difficult as possible' if it remained in the EU for a long period, the European Parliament's Brexit negotiator Guy Verhofstadt responded: 'For those in the EU who may be tempted to further extend the #Brexit saga, I can only say, be careful what you wish for.'
Tory Brexiteer Mark Francois said Theresa May's letter to Donald Tusk was a 'mistake' and said: 'We should just leave the European Union because that's what 17.4 million people voted for'. Mr Francois also accused the Prime Minister of having 'completely ignored' her Cabinet - which he said was 'unconstitutional' - as he claimed 14 Cabinet ministers said the UK should leave next week with no deal. 
Eurosceptic Conservative MP John Redwood tweeted: 'No more delays. The government should just get on with leaving the EU on 12 April. Offer a free trade agreement and go. The talks with Mr Corbyn cannot result in an outcome that honours Brexit and pleases Leave voters.'
EU sources have said they will reject Mrs May's June 30 Brexit date and tell her that a year-long deal is the only option. With No Deal now off the table she would be forced to accept it. 
But it also emerged Emmanuel Macron could break ranks with the EU and is still considering whether to dump Britain out of the EU unless it finds a 'credible plan'. French diplomatic source slammed as 'clumsy plans of a 'flexible extension' for Britain to leave the EU in the next year.  
Theresa May's cabinet is considering giving MPs a vote on holding a second referendum as the price of a deal with Jeremy Corbyn, it emerged today, but Mr Corbyn appears to be in no rush to find an agreement.

WEDNESDAY APRIL 10: EU SUMMIT
Another summit with EU leaders – where May will ask for a new delay beyond April 12. 
May's new plan is to strike a cross-party consensus in London and persuade EU leaders it means the deal can be delivered in time for Brexit on May 22.
She may have to accept a longer extension that means holding EU elections, as Brussels has made clear this is a red line - and will take a decision on delay without Britain and it must be unanimous. 
EU officials including Michel Barnier have warned that the risk of an accidental No Deal is increasing if May arrives with no plan.
THURSDAY APRIL 11: PM'S FACES MPs
Theresa May will return from Brussels with a likely nine to 12 month extension and will outline her plans in the the Commons in the wake of the EU summit.
FRIDAY APRIL 12: BREXIT DAY
Britain is due to leave the EU without a deal on this date if no delay is agreed. 
He said today: 'We don't think the European elections are an issue one way or another. The more important thing is to get an agreement on our future relationship with Europe. If there are elections we will contest them'.
Brexiteer Tory Marcus Fysh told MailOnline 'we don't need more time, we need the right approach' and suggested Tory grassroots members might refuse to help elect Conservative candidates if the UK took part in the European elections.
He said: 'They [the EU] don't want an unhelpful and unhappy group in the European Parliament and local Conservative parties will not be working to get Conservatives elected under the circumstances. 
And ERG deputy chairman Steve Baker added: 'The PM could get us out with a deal if only she would secure changes to the backstop in line with the Brady amendment which she whipped for. If only the Government would abandon pursuit of a customs union in all but name, this crisis would end.' 
Theresa May's cabinet is considering giving MPs a vote on holding a second referendum as the price of a deal with Jeremy Corbyn, it emerged today.
Talks between Mrs May and Mr Corbyn continue today with a customs union proposal looking the most likely compromise. 
But Labour's deputy leader Tom Watson said today it's 'highly unlikely' that the party would support a cross-party deal with the Prime Minister if a second referendum was not included.    
Attorney General Geoffrey Cox last night warned that Britain would be stuck in the EU for at least another year unless the Government cuts a soft Brexit deal with the Labour leader. He said it was now the only way in which Britain was likely to leave the EU next month.
Several Brexiteer ministers are pushing Mrs May to rule out a long delay, with a handful even urging her to take Britain out of the EU without a deal next Friday if Parliament continues to refuse to pass her plan.
Mr Cox told the BBC that unless a deal can be cut with Labour the delay would be a 'long one... longer than just a few weeks or months'.  
DUP leader Arlene Foster said the Prime Minister's request for an extension was 'unsurprising but unsatisfactory'.
Theresa May has written to European Council president Donald Tusk requesting an extension to Article 50 until June 30.
The Prime Minister said she will seek to ratify her Withdrawal Agreement before the European Parliament elections on May 23, but will make 'responsible preparations' to take part if that does not prove possible.
Britain is due to leave the European Union at the end of next week, but Mrs May is now seeking to delay Brexit for a second time after her deal was rejected for a third time last week.
In her letter, she wrote: 'I am writing therefore to inform the European Council that the United Kingdom is seeking a further extension to the period provided under Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, including as applied by Article 106a of the Euratom Treaty.
'The United Kingdom proposes that this period should end on 30 June 2019. If the parties are able to ratify before this date, the Government proposes that the period should be terminated early.
'The Government will want to agree a timetable for ratification that allows the United Kingdom to withdraw from the European Union before 23 May 2019 and therefore cancel the European Parliament elections, but will continue to make responsible preparations to hold the elections should this not prove possible.'
Mrs May said if ongoing talks with Labour do not lead to a 'single unified approach soon' then the Government would instead look to establish a 'consensus' on options on a future relationship that could be put to the Commons.
She wrote: 'The Government stands ready to abide by the decision of the House, if the Opposition will commit to doing the same.' 
'It should not have been like this,' she said. 'Exiting the EU has become chaotic because of intransigence in Brussels and ineffectiveness in London.
'The United Kingdom fighting European elections almost three years after a clear majority voted to leave the EU sums up the disorganised and slapdash approach taken to negotiations by the Prime Minister.'
Mrs Foster said Mrs May should not be 'subcontracting the UK's future to Jeremy Corbyn' by going into talks with the Labour leader.
She said: 'We want a sensible deal which protects the Union and respects the referendum result but it was foolish strategically in the negotiations to limit the UK's leverage by removing 'no deal' from the table.
'The Prime Minister should not waste any extension by subcontracting the UK's future to Jeremy Corbyn. This time should be used to get a better deal which works for every part of the United Kingdom so the entire nation can leave the European Union together.'
Last night the delay had not been signed off by the Cabinet, which is deeply split over how long to ask for. The move came amid signs that ministers are closing in on a deal with Labour that is likely to involve some form of customs union and guarantees on workers' rights and environmental standards.
After two days of intensive talks, officials were last night working on a formal letter to Labour setting out the broad scope of a possible deal.
Sources played down reports that the package would include a second referendum although they pointed out there would be nothing to stop Parliament attempting to attach one to the deal. But both sides described talks, which will continue today, as constructive.
One Tory source said: 'There has been a bit of capitulation on both sides. Everyone is looking to have something imposed on them – get a deal done and blame the other side for the bits they don't like. It could all come crashing down, but at the moment it's in play.' 
Mrs May launched formal talks with Labour on Wednesday after MPs rejected her deal three times. 
The decision has prompted a furious Tory backlash, with Eurosceptic MPs threatening to go 'on strike' and up to 15 ministers saying they will quit if the deal includes a customs union.
But in an interview with the BBC's Political Thinking podcast, Mr Cox said the Government had no choice but to agree a compromise if Britain was still to leave the EU. 
He warned that with Parliament now legislating to force the Government to seek a delay to avoid a No Deal Brexit next week, Mrs May 'would have little choice but to accept the extension that she's offered'. 
Asked if Mr Corbyn could become the midwife of Brexit, he replied: 'So be it. What matters is this is born.' 
The Cabinet is split over how long an extension to ask the EU for. At a seven-hour Cabinet showdown on Tuesday, up to 14 ministers voiced doubts about a long extension that would delay Brexit beyond the European Parliament elections on May 23.
Tory MPs could go on 'vote strike' to protest against Theresa May's courting of Jeremy Corbyn as she seeks a soft Brexit compromise.
The Prime Minister has ended her efforts to win over hardline Brexiteers and the DUP to support her deal - and called for a compromise with Labour instead.
A second day of talks between senior ministers and Labour officials concluded at the Cabinet Office today amid hopes of a new cross-party deal in time for next week's EU summit.
But even if she does pull off the political miracle of bringing Labour on board with a Brexit plan, scores of her MPs are ready to effectively end her ability to get other business through the Commons.
One senior MP told MailOnline: 'There is talk of a vote strike. People are telling the whips that unless she goes, MPs won't vote. 
'They won't get any Government business through - though they would vote, of course, in a confidence vote.'  
The Prime Minister fought and won a vote of no confidence in her party leadership in December - meaning she cannot be forced out by party rules.
But demands are mounting for the party's backbench 1922 Committee to call another vote anyway.
The theory is a new secret ballot would allow ministers to join a revolt and produce a landslide vote against Mrs May's leadership. 
Success would be yet another political humiliation piled onto the ailing Prime Minister and could force her out. 
Just ten Cabinet ministers backed a long delay to give time to negotiate a new deal. Downing Street yesterday confirmed that preparations for the elections are likely to go ahead, but insisted the £100million exercise could be called off as late as the day before if the Government is able to get a Brexit deal through Parliament.
Members of the 'Pizza Club' of pro-Brexit Tory MPs met on Wednesday night in the office of Commons leader Andrea Leadsom. 
In attendance were several Cabinet ministers including Penny Mordaunt, Jeremy Hunt and Chris Grayling. 
One minister told the Daily Mail: 'Ministers were saying, 'It is miserable, but we need an alternative. We fear Brexit isn't going to happen in the next 18 months'.'
Senior ministers clashed yesterday over whether the Government should contemplate agreeing a second referendum, which Mr Corbyn is under pressure from Labour activists to demand.
Chancellor Philip Hammond described the idea as a 'perfectly credible option'. But Health Secretary Matt Hancock said: 'That's certainly not how I would describe it.' Mr Corbyn is under intense pressure from MPs and activists to demand a referendum as the price of any deal. 
But the Labour leader has indicated he believes a second vote is only needed to 'stop a damaging Tory Brexit or a No Deal'.
Spartan chief Steve Baker told MailOnline: 'The Chancellor has come up with about the stupidest suggestion I could imagine. Look at the rage and despair created by asking Parliament to choose between Brexit in name only or no Brexit, and then imagine the public reaction. Is he trying to destroy all faith in democracy?'. 
There were reportedly talks on creating a 'devolution lock' that would give Edinburgh, Cardiff and Belfast a veto on any future changes to the UK-EU relationship, according to BuzzFeed News.
Downing Street denied this as 'categorically untrue'. 
Tom Watson today heaped more pressure on Jeremy Corbyn to demand a second referendum from Theresa May as Labour's price for agreeing a Brexit deal.
The party's deputy leader said that it's 'highly unlikely' members would support a cross-party agreement the Prime Minister if another public vote on leaving the EU was not included in some way. 
Labour is split over Brexit after Emily Thornberry contradicted her leader by also demanding a second referendum on any deal. 
But yesterday a group of 25 of his backbenchers wrote to Mr Corbyn warning against the inclusion of a second referendum in any compromise Brexit deal negotiated with the Government. 
The letter warned that a second referendum would be 'exploited by the far-Right, damage the trust of many core Labour voters and reduce our chances of winning a General Election'. 
Labour is meeting the government for a third day of talks on a possible solution to the impasse over Brexit, with May seeking a further delay while she seeks to find a deal that can get parliamentary support.
Mr Watson told BBC Radio 4's Today programme that negotiations are 'making progress', he said, and both sides are hoping for 'a creative solution' - which could include another referendum.
He added: 'One of the solutions to break a parliamentary impasse is to ask the people to run their slide rule over Theresa May's deal.
'They can work out for themselves whether this deal works for them and their families.'
Mr Watson revealed that Labour opened nominations on Thursday for candidates to stand in the European elections. 
Theresa May and Donald Tusk's very different visions for the next Brexit delay set up an incredibly tense period for the Prime Minister both at home and abroad.
Mrs May has said she will seek an extension to June 30 - a date already rejected once by EU leaders - at an emergency summit in Brussels.
Her letter to the European Council president Mr Tusk came after he said that he wanted an extension to March 31 next year as 'the only reasonable way out' of the crisis.
But the decision will ultimately be made unanimously by the heads of state of the other 27 EU states, who overruled Mr Tusk last time round to offer the UK just two weeks until April 12 if no Brexit deal had been agreed. 
It means there is still a great deal of uncertainty over what extension - if any, the Brussels summit will come up with next week.
Against this backdrop talks continue between Mrs May's top team and senior Labour figures over plans for a compromise Brexit deal that would allow the UK to leave as soon as possible.
They will sit down again today in a bid to hammer out a deal acceptable to both parties.
But the move had threatened to shatter both parties, with Tories aghast that Mrs May is negotiating with a hard Left leader and Labour MPs worried that Mr Corbyn, a long-term Brexiteer, might not seek a second referendum on any deal agreed.
If they do agree a deal there is still time for a vote to be held in the Commons before the Brussels summit. 
If the talks come to nothing, Mrs May has indicated she would present MPs with her own version of 'indicative votes - options for Brexit that they get to vote on - which could also be held before the summit.
But previous backbench-led votes like this have so far to win a majority,  hence the current situation is a total mess.
Last night peers were spared an all-night sitting over a controversial move to pass in one day a Bill extending the Brexit process in a bid to avoid a No Deal scenario.
After seven hours of procedural wrangling on whether the European Union (Withdrawal) (No.5) Bill should be pushed through in just one sitting, a deal was reached to complete the second reading stage last night.
But its detailed committee and report stages, and third reading, will be taken on Monday, sparing weary peers the prospect of votes through the night.
Under the rebel law the Commons will set out demands for the length of the new Brexit. The Government says if the EU Council offers a different delay - whether in length or with conditions - the PM will not be able to agree it without a further vote in Parliament.
If Parliament makes further demands instead of rubber stamping whatever comes from Brussels, there would need to be further talks among EU leader - effectively impossible when the second vote would be on April 11 and exit due the following day.    
What has Mrs May asked for? 
In her letter to Donald Tusk she formally requested an extension to Article 50 that will delay the UK's departure beyond April 12 to June 30 - but she also wants a 'termination clause'.
This would allow the UK to leave on May 22 - the day before European elections - if a deal can be pushed through the UK Parliament.
However, this delay is a carbon copy of that sought by Mrs May before the last emergency summit in March - which was rejected.
What has the EU said?
Mr Tusk said that a 12-month 'flextension' to March 29 2020 is 'the only reasonable way out' of the crisis and will urge leaders of the EU's 27 member states to back him later today. 
Such an extension is likely to spark fury among Tory Brexiteer MPs, with Jacob Rees-Mogg suggesting if we were kept in we should be troublesome to the rest of the EU, politically.
And Mrs May has previously said she would not be able to accept such a delay - suggesting it could prompt her to resign. This could lead to a summer leadership battle in Tory ranks before a new, most likely Brexiteer leader, takes over.
What is happening in the cross party talks? 
The Prime Minister has said the divorce deal could not be changed but announced on Tuesday she would seek a new consensus with Jeremy Corbyn on the political declaration about the final UK-EU agreement. 
Talks are taking place for a third day on Friday between ministers and officials from both parties, with previous efforts being hailed as 'constructive. 
If the talks fail, Mrs May has promised to put options to Parliament and agreed to be bound by the result. In a second round of indicative votes on Monday night a customs union, Norway-style soft Brexit and second referendum were the leading options - but none got a majority of MPs.   
What does Mrs May's shift mean?  
It suggests Mrs May has abandoned all hope of winning over remaining Tory Brexiteers and the DUP on the terms of her current deal.
Striking a cross-party deal on the future relationship will require Mrs May to abandon many of her red lines - including potentially on free movement and striking trade deals.
To get an agreement with Labour, Mrs May will need to agree the political declaration should spell out a much softer Brexit than her current plans do. This might mean a permanent UK-EU customs union or even staying in the EU Single Market.
What if Mr Corbyn says No? 
Mrs May said if she cannot cut a deal with Corbyn, she would ask Parliament to come up with options - and promised to follow orders from MPs.
In a second round of indicative votes on Monday night a customs union, Norway-style soft Brexit and second referendum were the leading options - but none got a majority of MPs.
They would probably pass if the Tories whipped for them - but it would almost certainly mean ministers quitting the Government. 
Can either option be completed before the PM goes to Brussels? 
Yes there is still technically time. The Government would have to table a motion the night before any such vote was due to be held.
MPs would then have time the following day to debate what was on offer - and possibly suggest their own changes - before it is put to a vote, probably in the evening.  
In practice, talks with Mr Corbyn and his team must have concluded by Monday at the very latest to give time for MPs to have their say if she is to make demand to the EU ahead of next week's summit. 
When will Brexit be? 
It is hard to say - but it is unlikely to be next week on April 12. 
Mrs May has asked for an extension to June 30. Donald Tusk has suggested a year. 
There are EU leaders like France's Emmanuel Macron who have played Bad Cop and said they want us gone quickly. But others, including Germany's Angela Merkel, has been more conciliatory, suggesting yesterday she would show more flexibility to get a deal. 
The PM clearly still wants to get out of the EU before European Parliament elections have to be held on May 22 but this is ultimately up to Brussels.
Will the EU agree to this? 
It is hard to say. The EU has said it is open to further extension if there is a clear purpose and plan. Open ended talks on the future framework are unlikely to qualify.
A clear, negotiable goal for the future framework probably would do. The EU has always said it is open to Britain staying in the Single Market and Customs Union. 

Will May resign? 
Nodbody knows for sure. Last week, Mrs May announced she would go if and when her divorce deal passed so a new Tory leader could take charge of the trade talks phase.
In practice, it drained Mrs May of all remaining political capital. Most in Westminster think her Premiership is over within weeks at the latest. 
As her deal folded for a third time last Friday, she faced immediate calls from Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn so stand down with instant effect. 
What is clear is there is already a fight underway for the Tory leadership.  
Does is all mean there will be an election?
Probably, at some point though the immediate chances have fallen because of the latest events. The Commons is deadlocked and the Government has no functional majority. While the Fixed Term Parliaments Act means the Government can stumble on, it will become increasingly powerless.
Mrs May could try to call one herself or, assuming she stands down, her successor could do so.  
Would May lead the Tories into an early election? 
Unlikely. Having admitted to her party she would go if the deal passes, Mrs May's political career is doomed.
While there is no procedural way to remove her, a withdrawal of political support from the Cabinet or Tory HQ would probably finish her even if she wanted to stay.    
How is an election called? When would it be? 
Because of the Fixed Term Parliaments Act passed by the coalition, the Prime Minister can no longer simply ask the Queen to dissolve the Commons and call an election. There are two procedures instead.
First - and this is what happened in 2017 - the Government can table a motion in the Commons calling for an early election. Crucially, this can only pass with a two-thirds majority of MPs - meaning either of the main parties can block it.
Second an election is called if the Government loses a vote of no confidence and no new administration can be built within 14 days.
In practice, this is can only happen if Tory rebels vote with Mr Corbyn - a move that would end the career of any Conservative MP who took the step. 
An election takes a bare minimum of five weeks from start to finish and it would take a week or two to get to the shut down of Parliament, known as dissolution - putting the earliest possible polling day around mid to late May. 
If the Tories hold a leadership election first it probably pushes any election out to late June at the earliest.  
Why do people say there has to be an election? 
The question of whether to call an election finally reached the Cabinet last week.
Brexit Secretary Stephen Barclay warned the rejection of Mrs May's deal would set in train a series of events that will lead to a softer Brexit - meaning an election because so many MPs will have to break manifesto promises. 
MPs voting to seize control of Brexit from ministers has only fuelled the demands.   
Labour has been calling for a new vote for months, insisting the Government has failed to deliver Brexit.
Mr Corbyn called a vote of no confidence in the Government in January insisting the failure of the first meaningful vote showed Mrs May's administration was doomed. He lost but the calls did not go away. 
Brexiteers have joined the demands in recent days as Parliament wrestles with Brexit and amid fears among hardliners promises made by both main parties at the last election will be broken - specifically on leaving the Customs Union and Single Market. 
Tory MP Andrew Bridgen wants Mrs May replaced with a Brexiteer. He believes it would push Remain Tories out of the party and then allow a snap election with more Eurosceptic candidates wearing blue rosettes.
What might happen? 
Both main parties will have to write a manifesto - including a position on Brexit. Both parties are deeply split - in many cases between individual MPs and their local activists.
Under Mrs May, the Tories presumably try to start with the deal. But it is loathed by dozens of current Tory MPs who want a harder Brexit and hated even more by grassroots Tory members. 
Shifting Tory policy on Brexit to the right would alienate the majority of current MPs who voted to Remain.
Labour has similar splits. Many of Labour's MPs and activists want Mr Corbyn to commit to putting Brexit to a second referendum - most with a view to cancelling it. 
Mr Corbyn is a veteran Eurosceptic and millions of people who voted Leave in 2016 backed Labour in 2017. 
The splits set the stage for a bitter and chaotic election. The outcome is highly unpredictable - the Tories start in front but are probably more divided on the main question facing the country.
Labour is behind but knows it made dramatic gains in the polls in the last election with its promises of vastly higher public spending. 
Neither side can forecast what impact new political forces might wield over the election or how any public anger over the Brexit stalemate could play out.
It could swing the result in favour of one of the main parties or a new force. 
Or an election campaign that takes months, costs millions of pounds could still end up in a hung Parliament and continued stalemate. This is the current forecast by polling expert Sir John Curtice. 
Labour has held the Newport West by-election but Brexit anger pushed up UKIP's vote share up a third. 
But support for Jeremy Corbyn's party and the Tories plunged amid the ongoing chaos in Westminster over Britain's stuttering exit from the EU.
Labour's Ruth Jones took the Commons seat with 39.6 per cent of the vote, but that was down 12.7 per cent on the result of the veteran MP Paul Flynn who died in February.   
But there was an increase in support for UKIP, whose candidate Neil Hamilton trebled its share of the vote when compared to the 2017 election - up from from 2.5 per cent to 8.6 per cent. 
The Tories came second with 31.3 per cent of the vote - down eight per cent in two years - but overall there was a 2.4 per cent swing from Labour to the Conservatives.
Mrs Jones had been the clear favourite to succeed Mr Flynn, who held the Newport West seat for 32 years, winning with a majority of 5,658 and more than half the vote in 2017. 
Jones took 9,308 votes, giving her a majority of 1,951 over the Tory candidate Matthew Evans.
UKIP's Neil Hamilton took third place with 2,023 votes as the party saw support increase. 
The city has long been a Labour stronghold and voted Leave by a margin of 56 per cent to 44 per cent in the 2016 in-out referendum. 
Voter turnout was 37.1 per cent, down from 67.5 per cent in the 2017 general election, with parties blaming poor weather including rain and hail on Thursday. 
 
Attorney General defends inviting Jeremy Corbyn into Brexit talks – saying 'we must use any lawful means' to ensure UK leaves the EU 
Attorney General Geoffrey Cox has defended inviting Jeremy Corbyn to Brexit talks, saying 'we must use any lawful means' to ensure the UK leaves the EU. 
Mr Cox said that if Government discussions with Labour fail to deliver an agreement the UK faced a long extension to Article 50.
The Attorney General suggested that in such circumstances Prime Minister Theresa May would have little choice but to accept what the EU offered her.
Welcoming the cross-party talks, Mr Cox told BBC Radio 4's Political Thinking with Nick Robinson podcast: 'I say we must use any means to secure the ends, any lawful means.
'We are assisting at the birth of something new. Births are not always easy and we must take the necessary steps to achieve our departure.'
Asked if that meant Mr Corbyn would be the midwife, the Attorney General replied: 'So be it. What matters is this is born.'
The Attorney General said failure to reach agreement with Labour would have repercussions.
Mr Cox said: 'The problem, then, would be that we would be in an extension. It's likely to be a long one, by which I mean longer than just a few weeks or months.'
He added: 'We will no doubt be offered an extension with a date on it and the Prime Minister will be required to accept or reject it.'
Mr Cox said the backbench Bill brought forward by Labour's Yvette Cooper and others, which forces the Government to seek an extension if no deal has been agreed by April 12, would leave the PM with little room to manoeuvre.
Referring to the Bill's impact on a no deal option, the Attorney General said: 'It rules it out... the Prime Minister would have little choice but to accept the extension that she's offered.'
Mr Cox was cool on the prospect of another Brexit referendum.
He said: 'I think a good deal of persuasion might be needed to satisfy the Government that a second referendum would be appropriate. But of course we will consider any suggestion that's made.'
The Attorney General said Mr Corbyn was not fit to be PM.
He said: 'The opposition is simply not fit to govern. The leader of the opposition is simply not fit to be Prime Minister of this country.
'It is vital that the Conservative Party sustains itself in office and sustains its unity.' 
Customs Union
Until now, Theresa May has said the UK will leave the European Union's customs union.
The customs union eliminates duties – or tariffs – between member states, while EU countries impose a common external tariff on imports from non-members.
But the customs union also allows the EU to strike trade deals on behalf of all its members.
The Prime Minister made leaving the customs union a 'red line' in her negotiations due to her desire to strike independent trade deals with other countries – such as the USA.
Remaining in the union would stop this because the UK would be barred from reducing its tariffs on imported goods from other countries.
They could only strike deals in the services sector – however this does make up a vast part of the modern UK economy.
Jeremy Corbyn wants a permanent customs union. He says it will help protect existing trade between the UK and EU, in particular that of manufactured goods which relies on complex supply chains – links which can break down if goods are delayed at the border.
Labour also says that remaining in the customs union will help keep trade flowing freely between Northern Ireland and the Republic without the need for the so-called 'backstop'.
Mr Corbyn claims his proposal does include the UK having a say on future trade deals negotiated by the EU and affecting the UK. But this is something Brussels has apparently ruled out.
Despite all this, senior Tory ministers were out in force yesterday preparing the ground for a customs union compromise. Attorney General Geoffrey Cox argued that the customs union might be needed to get out – claiming the UK could leave at a later point and a customs union would not be a 'permanent straitjacket'.
Employment rights
Under Mrs May's deal, the UK agrees not to row back on existing EU rules on workers' rights – such as the Working Time Directive which limits working hours – after we leave.
But Mr Corbyn wants to go further and is demanding 'dynamic alignment' – meaning any future government would agree to accept any employment laws and trade union rules passed by the EU in future, regardless of Parliament's wishes. So what if the EU agreed to a four-day working week, or passed other regulations which would erode competitiveness?
Mrs May claims to be a champion of workers' rights, so this is an area she could argue is consistent with her approach, even if it limits the UK's ability to set its own course in future because we are tied to Brussels diktats.
Free movement
In theory, the parties are not far apart on free movement – one of the central issues of the referendum campaign.
Vast numbers of Labour voters backed Leave because they oppose uncontrolled immigration. This was reflected in Labour's manifesto which said free movement will end after we leave.
For Mrs May, ending free movement is her reddest of red lines. But Labour policy on what migration policy should replace free movement is significantly more liberal than Tory policy. In particular, the Opposition is against the proposed £30,000 minimum earnings requirement for post-Brexit working visas.
Could Mr Corbyn demand this is scrapped and a lower earnings threshold imposed?
Second referendum
Publicly, Downing Street officials have not ruled out agreeing to a second referendum.
Yet if anything is a deal breaker, it is a demand for another Brexit vote. The whole point of the talks with Mr Corbyn – and the reward for Mrs May enduring civil war in the Tory Party – is that Brexit goes through in short order with Labour backing.
But a second referendum, with Remain on the ballot paper, would require a Brexit delay of at least a year and the UK taking part in MEP elections next month – both currently unacceptable to Mrs May.
On Mr Corbyn's side, the second referendum is the issue which divides his Shadow Cabinet, MPs, activists and voters like no other. Agree to a deal without one and the Remainers in his party will be livid.
If he wants to deliberately crash the talks, this is what Mr Corbyn demand
All you need to know about the Brexit pantomime currently being played out in the 'Supreme Court' is that the judges involved are reported to have spent part of the weekend practising their ceremonial entrance.
They held a dummy run ahead of the hearing to make sure they could walk to their thrones and sit down without falling over in front of the TV cameras.
There's only room for seven of them, but all 11 wanted to be in the movie, so special seating arrangements had to be made. It's the first time the full complement of judges has assembled for a single case.
Scroll down for video 
Proceedings are being streamed on the internet, as well as the rolling news channels. Ostensibly, this is hailed as a triumph for 'transparency', but my guess is that there's an alternative motive.
The judges wanted to ensure that their performances were preserved for posterity, so they could watch the video with friends and family over and over again at Christmas — a judicial version of It's A Wonderful Life.
If football referees play back their games on a Monday morning, why not judges?
'Look darling, that's me — third from the right, next to old Nobby Neuberger. Maybe I should have gone with the MCC tie, instead of the National Liberal Club.
'It's true what they say, though. TV does put 10 lb on you. Do you think I should go on the 5:2 diet before we hand down our decision? Probably a good time to lay off the jam roly-poly for a few weeks. I'm turning into Rumpole of the Bailey.
'By the way, have we got any more of that Chateau Thames Embankment from Aldi in the pantry? We have? Fabulous!
'Hang on, wind it back. That was a terrific point of law I just made, about article 49, clause 12, subsection 14.
'Back of the net!'
Some might accuse me of lacking respect for the judiciary, but what the hell. I've always belonged to the Dick the Butcher school, from Shakespeare's Henry VI, Part II. 'First thing we do,' says Dick, 'let's kill all the lawyers.'
Works for me, starting with all those two-bob spivs who advertise for 'trip and fall' comp-en-say-shun claims on daytime TV, right up to M'lords and Laydee who sit in the ludicrously titled 'Supreme Court'.
Any faith I had in the judiciary went out of the window during the Leveson Inquisition into the Press, conducted by Sir Brian — or My Noble Lord, or His Royal Majesty, or El Presidente, or whatever he calls himself this week — Leveson, who displayed a level of understanding of my trade which bordered on the cretinous.
His reward was to be appointed Chief High Executioner, or something, on the thick end of a couple of hundred thousand sovs a year. Cue Gilbert & Sullivan, and bring on the dancing girls.
There was a dopey bird on the wireless yesterday, claiming to represent Britain's 15,500 barristers, accusing the Daily Mail of behaving like Hitler for daring to question the impartiality of judges. Oh, for heaven's sake, grow up, pet. Your puerile hyperbole only serves to prove our point.
And who knew that we had 15,500 barristers in Britain, on top of the assorted solicitors, paralegals and PPI parasites? What do they all do, apart from make a bloody nuisance of themselves?
Look, for the record, I acknowledge that we need the rule of law. But I have the utmost contempt for most of its practitioners, who think they are the law, rather than its mere custodians. In the immortal words of Tony Hancock: 'Magna Carta — did she die in vain?'
Maybe it was always thus. Peter Cook was making a good living poking fun at judges in the Sixties. But the rot really set in after the Labour landslide in 1997. Don't forget that Blair claimed the incorporation of the corrupt European 'yuman rites' act into British law was his proudest achievement in politics.
Of course it was. His missus and her mates made a killing, hoovering up millions in legal aid for representing terrorists, rapists, murderers, illegal immigrants, child molesters and assorted chancers.
And these days the Wicked Witch is a judge, too, when she's not buying another house or lecturing us loftily on 'parenting'.
Here's a top tip, Cherie baby. We're not interested in what you think about anything, sweetheart.
But the whole point of the Blair Project was to install judicial activism above popular democracy.
The intention was always to lock us in so tightly to the EU that the judges would be able to scupper any vote to leave. This week's 'Supreme Court' spectacular was in the script. And that's precisely where we've arrived.
Frankly, my dear, I don't give a damn about whatever decision the so-called 'Supreme Court' hands down eventually, even if it goes the way I'd prefer. The simple fact is: they shouldn't be involved in the process at all.
This whole attempt to sabotage the democratic will of the British people should never have been allowed to get this far.
But, as always, everybody has to be in the movie — and this time it's the judges' turn to take centre stage. They're like those gormless prats who stand behind TV reporters on location, waving and pulling faces at the camera.
Hello, Mum!
Only in the case of judges, it's not just about being on telly, it's about showing us plebs who's boss.
What they don't begin to understand is that, to employ a cliche, they're part of the problem, not the solution.
When Britain voted Leave, we were rejecting the whole rotten edifice — up to and including the self-regarding, self-important, self-perpetuating judicial class, who despite their aloof blather about their 'independence' are ultimately subordinate to Europe.
And still we've ended up with the future of our nation pivoting on a perverse show trial, conducted by 11 'learned friends' who don't even trust themselves to put one foot in front of the other without falling flat on their backsides in front of the TV cameras.
Makes you proud to be British.
Vets are concerned about the number of pets turning up drunk at their surgeries, especially at Christmas.
During the festive season, they claim, owners are more likely to collapso on the sofa, leaving the dregs of their booze as a temptation to curious animals.
Dogs are particularly vulnerable. That, I can believe. I've had a couple of labradors in my life and both of them would drink anything.
Sherry, my mum and dad's dog, was so named after she knocked over a bottle of Harveys Bristol Cream and downed the lot.
Ossie, our lab named in honour of the legendary Osvaldo Ardiles, Spurs and Argentina midfielder, once scoffed a whole box of chocolate liqueurs — managing to guzzle them all while leaving the wrappers untouched.
Obviously, his knees went all trembly. But apart from sleeping for 24 hours, while breaking wind in Hurricane Katrina fashion, he showed no other ill-effects.
Unlike my mate's red setter, who slurped a pint of IPA and five minutes later was stumbling about the house crashing into furniture.
We've all been there.
How long before the Old Bill gets, er, wind of this worrying new trend and starts setting up road blocks to breathalyse boozed-up boxers and paralytic poodles?
I think I've got a lead, guv.
Today's edition of Mind How You Go comes courtesy of Thames Valley Police and the Met, who have both made videos based on the 'mannequin' craze doing the rounds on the internet.
For the uninitiated, this involves assuming a 'time stood still' pose for a few seconds. Or, as children of my vintage knew it, 'doing a Dr Kildare' — after the freeze frame opening titles of the popular Sixties American hospital drama, starring Richard Chamberlain as Dr Kildare and Raymond Massey as Dr Gillespie.
Still, it gives a whole new meaning to: 'Armed police — freeze!'
The funniest, cleverest gig I've seen this year was Rory Bremner at a charity lunch in London last week. 
His Trump, Obama, Boris and Clinton were sensational and the script was as sharp as a Stanley knife. Politics has never been so volatile, or as much fun. Why will none of the networks give him another series? 
The rural economy has gone so far down the gurgler after Brexit that you can now buy three horses for a tenner, according to the RSPCA. Which may be bad news for equestrianism, but is great news for French restaurants.
Quangocrat Dame Somebody Or Other has delivered an official report announcing that mass immigration has produced Muslim ghettoes in Britain. Tell us something we don't know, love.
Next week, Dame Twanky reports exclusively on what bears do in the woods.
After the great global warming scam was exposed as complete fiction, the alarmists are now warning that Britain can expect to be hit by 65ft-high tsunamis.
No, we won't.
 
Theresa May today urges Parliament to ‘do its duty’ and vote through her Brexit deal.
Writing in the Daily Mail, she says she is close to winning concessions from the EU that could persuade Eurosceptic MPs to back her.
Mrs May yesterday faced a mass walkout by Remainer ministers and was forced to offer MPs a vote to delay Brexit beyond March 29 if she cannot get her plans through the Commons.
But in an upbeat assessment of her talks with Brussels and European leaders, she said: ‘I have found a real determination to find a way through which allows the UK to leave with a deal. That engagement has already begun to bear fruit.
‘Parliament should do its duty so our country can move forward.’
The Prime Minister’s decision to sanction a possible Brexit delay prompted a furious row in Cabinet yesterday, with Amber Rudd, David Gauke, Greg Clark and Claire Perry facing a backlash for forcing the PM’s hand on a postponement by publicly threatening to resign.
Analysis by Jack Doyle, Associate Editor for the Daily Mail
MARCH 12: The vote on the PM’s deal
By this date Mrs May must return to the Commons with her deal and put it before MPs. After multiple delays, this really will be D-Day. She lost the first vote by 230 votes in January.
She now has two clear weeks to secure whatever concessions she can eke out of Brussels on the Northern Ireland backstop and put an amended deal back before the Commons.
To secure victory, she will need to win over the Northern Irish DUP, and at least some of the hardline Eurosceptics on the Tory Right.
If – and it’s a big if – she succeeds, Britain could leave the EU with only a short delay after March 29 to pass essential Brexit legislation.
MARCH 13: The ‘No Deal’ Vote
If the Prime Minister cannot get her deal through on or before March 12 then the following day she will table a motion asking MPs if they support leaving without a deal. The Commons is likely to reject No Deal overwhelmingly as it has already indicated its opposition to this form of Brexit.
Mrs May refused several times yesterday to say if she would vote against a No Deal Brexit – or if the Government would ‘whip’ the vote, thereby instructing its MPs how to vote.
She insisted: ‘The absolute focus should be on working to get a deal and leaving on 29 March.’
MARCH 14: The ‘Delay Brexit’ Vote
If the Commons rejects leaving without a deal, the Government will table a motion the following day asking if MPs want to ask the EU for an extension to Article 50 beyond March 29.
This is likely to pass. Again, No 10 would not say yesterday if the vote would be subject to a ‘whip’. What happens afterwards remains unclear.
MPs will, in all likelihood, force her to ask the EU for a delay. This would fray Tory unity, embolden the supporters of a second referendum and put a huge question mark over Brexit happening in any form.
Any Article 50 extension would need to approved by other EU leaders. A three-month extension, dragging out the process until the end of June, has been suggested. There remains the awkward issue of European elections in May but the new European Parliament is not scheduled to sit until July.
Thus the outgoing parliament, including its British members, may still need to ratify a Brexit deal.
In a counterblast today, former Brexit secretary David Davis accuses Mrs May of ‘capitulating to blackmail’ and warns that opening the door to a delay sends the wrong message to Brussels.
Also writing in the Mail, Mr Davis is scathing about ‘mutineer ministers encircling the Prime Minister’.
He writes: ‘The Prime Minister should ignore those ministers currently having a panic attack about the prospects of No Deal. Their fears are exaggerated. While No Deal might – might – be economically difficult, no Brexit would be a democratic disaster.’
As a cross-party group led by Labour’s Yvette Cooper and Tory Sir Oliver Letwin dropped plans to force a vote on letting Parliament seize control of Brexit:
Mrs May’s decision to open the door to a Brexit delay appeared to have averted the threat of an immediate rebellion last night.
At least 15 ministers had threatened to resign to vote for the proposal put forward by Miss Cooper, which would have allowed Parliament to force Mrs May to seek an extension of Article 50 if the PM had not achieved a deal by the middle of next month.
Instead, Mrs May set out a new timetable which would achieve a similar effect. She confirmed that MPs would get a second ‘meaningful vote’ on her Brexit deal by March 12. The first last month led to a record government defeat. If the deal fails to pass again MPs would vote the next day on whether to back No Deal.
If No Deal is formally rejected MPs would have the chance to vote on extending Article 50 the following day.
Mrs May said any delay should be as short as possible.
But Jacob Rees-Mogg, a leading Tory Brexiteer, said a short delay would mean ‘the cliff edge is simply moved back’. He added: ‘This effort to play call-my-bluff is not going to change people’s minds to back her deal.’
Carolyn Fairbairn, director general of the CBI, said: ‘Moves to avert No Deal in March are essential. To avoid a hammer blow to firms and livelihoods, delay cannot simply be an extension of stalemate. Compromise is the only way.’ 
Theresa May raised eyebrows yesterday after saying the options for Brexit were ‘simples’, in reference to the meerkat stars of a TV advert.
The Prime Minister quoted the Compare The Market slogan to her bemused colleagues.
SNP Westminster leader Ian Blackford had claimed she was ‘running down the clock’ by offering only her deal or no deal.
Mrs May retorted: ‘If he wants to end the uncertainty... then he should vote for a deal. Simples.’
Labour MP Liz McInnes tweeted: ‘Theresa Meerkat is now in charge.'
Yes, we will leave EU with a deal - if MPs hold their nerve 
By Theresa May 
Despite the political controversy of the past few weeks at Westminster, I believe the United Kingdom remains firmly on course to leave the European Union with a deal – if MPs hold their nerve.
On January 29, the House of Commons expressed its support for that outcome, provided there were legal changes to the Northern Ireland backstop to prevent it operating indefinitely.
When the Government set out to secure those changes, I did not know what the response in Europe would be.
But in the discussions I have had with the leadership of the European Union and the leaders of every EU member state, I have found a real determination to find a way through which allows the UK to leave with a deal.
That engagement has already begun to bear fruit.
The UK and EU are working towards a joint work-stream to develop alternative arrangements to ensure the absence of a hard border in Northern Ireland, in parallel with our negotiations on the future relationship.
We are doing our own ministerial-led work – supported by civil service resources and with £20 million of government funding – to help develop, test and pilot proposals which can form part of these alternative arrangements.
We are also continuing to hold detailed discussions on the legal changes that are required to guarantee that the Northern Ireland backstop cannot endure indefinitely.
But securing the necessary changes to the backstop is not the only thing the Government is doing to build support for the deal across the House of Commons.
We are developing detailed plans to give Parliament a clearer and stronger role in the next phase of the negotiations, in which the UK and the EU will agree the detail of our future relationship. We are discussing with the EU what additions or changes can now be made to the political declaration outlining that future relationship that will increase people’s confidence in the ambition of both sides to agree to it as soon as possible.
And to protect workers’ rights, a concern for many MPs as we leave the EU, we will give Parliament a vote on whether it wishes to follow suit whenever the EU changes its standards. The UK leads the way on workers’ rights, environmental protections and health and safety – as we leave the EU, we will continue to enhance them.
I firmly believe that a deal is within our grasp.
Yesterday I committed in Parliament to give MPs a second meaningful vote on the withdrawal agreement by March 12 at the latest. I am confident that we can win that vote. But because many MPs are worried that if we lose that vote Parliament would not have time to make its voice heard on the next steps, I gave two other assurances.
If the Government has not won a meaningful vote by March 12, we will ask MPs if they support leaving the EU on March 29 without a Withdrawal Agreement.
If the House rejects leaving on March 29 without a deal, the Government will bring forward a motion on whether Parliament wants to seek a short limited extension to Article 50.
And if the House votes for an extension, we will seek to agree one with the EU and bring forward the necessary legislation.
But I do not want to see Article 50 extended.
Our absolute focus should be on working to get a deal and leaving on March 29. Doing so would give businesses and citizens the certainty they deserve.
By committing Labour to holding a second referendum, despite promising to implement Brexit, Jeremy Corbyn has shown once again that he cannot be trusted to keep his promises. His cynical political games would take us back to square one.
Instead, Parliament should do its duty so that our country can move forward.
We want to leave the EU with a deal that gives us the best of both worlds: a close relationship with our nearest neighbours and the chance to make the most of our talents and resources by building new relationships with growing economies around the world.
More than half a century ago, Mick Jagger and the Rolling Stones burst upon a still rather drab and regimented post-war world. They were the epitome of the Swinging Sixties and, like many other rock groups of the time, high priests of sexual permissiveness and drug use.
Much of the nation was shocked. A significant minority — perhaps over represented by men — was elated. What could be better than a sexual free-for-all and the widespread availability of marijuana and LSD?
Mick Jagger’s behaviour was emulated by thousands and tens of thousands and then millions. He went on to have numerous partners, got married and divorced, and then had lots more affairs. In the process, he has fathered eight children by five women. He has five grandchildren and one great-granddaughter.
Affair
As time passed, fewer people were shocked. The revolutionary sexual mores that Jagger and others had exemplified became the norm for millions of people, while those who tried to cleave to the old paths of marriage and family felt it wasn’t for them to cast aspersions.
And so, when at the start of this week the story broke that the 74-year-old Mick Jagger was on a date with a young woman called Noor Alfallah, who is 52 years younger than him, few eyebrows were raised — at least in the media. If anything, reports in news-papers were approving.
Please note that, according to Jagger’s spokesperson, he is still with his girlfriend, Melanie Hamrick, who is the mother of his ten-month-old son Deveraux. So this is only a brief excursion, then. I wonder what Melanie thinks.
Maybe a few lips were pursed down at the Dog and Duck, though I suspect the general feeling was ‘Good on yer, Mick’ if when you are old and wrinkly and possibly losing your marbles you can persuade a beautiful young woman to share your bed.
No one has dared to wonder publicly whether it was seemly or decent (very old-fashioned words, I know) for a man who has already exceeded his biblical span of three score years and ten to be having a fling with a woman young enough to be his grandchild.
It is, to be sure, a wholly consensual relationship, even if Noor Alfallah may well have been awed by Jagger’s fame, power and enormous riches. (She certainly can’t have been moved by his looks, and he is unlikely to be a repository of wisdom.)
Of one thing we may be fairly sure — that Noor will soon be succeeded by another young woman and then another until the old goat is eventually wheeled off the stage in a bath-chair.
But there is an irony in all this: whereas the antics of the septuagenarian rocker are widely indulged, many of the same people are in a state of apoplexy at the latest scandals seeping out of Westminster.
Needless to say, I am not referring to shocking allegations of rape and sexual assault which must be investigated by the police and, if proven, dealt with by the full force of the law.
No, I am thinking of suggestions that hands of older men may have been put on knees of younger women, who would have much preferred they had not been.
Yesterday, the normally sensible Times newspaper carried a piece by 31-year-old Kate Maltby, a critic and academic, who alleges that Damian Green, the First Secretary of State and effective deputy Prime Minister, put a ‘fleeting’ hand on her knee when they had a drink together in 2015.
Mr Green, who was not a minister at the time, and is a family friend of Miss Maltby’s, vehemently denies the charge. That hasn’t prevented the Tory MP Anna Soubry from demanding that he should stand down while the allegation is looked into.
There is no dispute that Sir Michael Fallon, the Defence Secretary, repeatedly put his hand on the knee of the journalist Julia Hartley-Brewer during a dinner party 15 years ago, as we learnt earlier this week. Julia, who knows how to look after herself, threatened to punch Fallon, who wisely desisted. Sir Michael’s resignation last night may well have been triggered by other, more serious, causes.
Obviously, men shouldn’t go around placing unwanted hands, fleeting or otherwise, on the knees of young women. The ‘victims’ may be cowed or impressionable, and lack the nous to threaten these pests in the robust manner of Julia Hartley-Brewer.
But is it a hanging offence? Should Mr Green be forced to resign if this one allegation against him is substantiated? Do such relatively minor incidents — and I categorically am not talking about serious allegations of assault — really warrant all the media hysteria and sepulchral faces observed over the past few days?
Libidinous
My answer to all these questions is: I don’t believe so. And I can’t help contrasting the fondness which is applied to the antics of the libidinous Mick Jagger with the grave indictments of Sir Michael Fallon, Mr Green and similar miscreants.
Is it possible that we are a little confused about sex? A tireless and promiscuous fornicator is honoured and celebrated, while a man (I am speaking of Mr Green now) who may, or may not, have placed a fleeting hand on a woman’s knee, is threatened with political ruin.
This apparent contradiction is part of a wider incongruity — which is that we live in a world of sexual permissiveness (of which Mick Jagger and his mates were, and remain, enthusiastic ambassadors) while at the same time we witness growing sexual puritanism.
So it is that the people who ventilate wildly about allegedly straying hands are usually completely unconcerned about the harmful effects of hardcore pornography, or family breakdown brought about by sexual licence.
Nor does it ever occur to such people that the sexual revolution, by removing long-standing inhibitions and boundaries, may have contributed to an increase in the number of serious sexual assaults.
Bizarre
In short, the hysterical critics of politicians allegedly guilty of ‘inappropriate behaviour’ are missing the point — which is that the sexual revolution has legitimised conduct which can be immeasurably more damaging than the occasional wandering hand.
But all this does not explain why such lunacy should have erupted during the past few days, as journalists, politicians and feminists have whipped up a bizarre witch-hunt that sometimes makes one fear for Britain’s collective sanity.
Surely, some sort of gigantic displacement is taking place. The Government faces the biggest peacetime challenge in living memory — namely how to leave the EU on the most advantageous terms possible without the country being torn apart.
Instead of confronting this monumental task, our political and media classes are channelling their energies into obsessing about the essentially trivial and unimportant issue of whether Damian Green’s hand briefly touched a young woman’s knee.
I don’t know what future historians will make of all this. But I do know that these past few days have constituted a kind of national mental breakdown as we have finally taken leave of our senses.
As for Mick Jagger — Sir Mick Jagger, I should say, knighted by (who else?) Tony Blair — I grant that he sang a few good songs, long ago. But isn’t it time this lascivious old rascal was taken down from his pedestal?
Britain's ambassador to Brussels took a swipe at ministers' 'muddled thinking' as he quit his post without warning today.
Sir Ivan Rogers shocked staff this afternoon by announcing his decision to step down from his post early - only three months before Britain's talks on leaving the EU are due to begin. 
In his 1,400-word resignation letter, Sir Ivan said ministers needed to hear 'unvarnished' and 'uncomfortable' views from Europe. 
He wrote: 'I hope you will continue to challenge ill-founded arguments and muddled thinking and that you will never be afraid to speak the truth to those in power.
'I hope that you will support each other in those difficult moments where you have to deliver messages that are disagreeable to those who need to hear them.'
The note, posted on The Times website, was seen as a barely coded attack on Theresa May and her top team, who have been accused of failing to spell out their plan for Brexit.

The Brussels veteran opted to walk after being cut adrift by Mrs May and her top team. His contract was up in November – and he did not expect it to be renewed.  


The timing of his resignation triggered claims of chaos and 'amateurism' in No 10.  
But diplomatic sources said Sir Ivan, who presided over David Cameron’s botched negotiations with Brussels, had decided to go only after it was made plain to him that his ‘days were numbered’.
Senior figures in No 10 and David Davis’s Brexit department were said to have been ‘baffled’ that Sir Ivan did not resign at the same time as Mr Cameron. Allies of the former prime minister heaped blame on Sir Ivan for being too ‘happy to take no for an answer, happy to believe things weren’t possible when they could be possible’. Aides of Mr Cameron claimed the ambassador had repeatedly threatened to resign during the EU negotiations before June’s referendum if his advice was ignored. 

Senior ministers and officials privately insisted Sir Ivan’s departure was ‘no loss’. They said his resignation provided Mrs May with an opportunity to appoint a replacement who ‘believes in Brexit’.

Meanwhile Tory MP Jacob Rees Mogg told MailOnline: 'It is crucial that whoever represents us in Brussels is wholly committed to Brexit. 
'Sadly the impartiality of the civil service came into question during the referendum campaign which made the position of the highly intelligent Sir Ivan difficult.'

George Osborne last night waded into the ambassador row by praising Sir Ivan Rogers as a ‘patriot’.
The former chancellor, in what was seen as a dig at the Prime Minister, described the outgoing diplomat as ‘a perceptive, pragmatic and patriotic public servant’.
At the same time, Mr Osborne’s ex-permanent secretary in the Treasury attacked the ‘amateurism’ of the May Government. Lord Macpherson of Earl’s Court condemned Number 10 for letting Sir Ivan leave. The ex-mandarin – given a peerage by David Cameron last year – wrote on Twitter: ‘Ivan Rogers huge loss. Can’t understand wilful & total destruction of EU expertise.’ He finished with the hashtag ‘#amateurism’.
Mr Osborne also used Twitter to launch his defence of Sir Ivan and suggest Number 10 had let a top operator slip through its fingers.
He said: ‘Ivan Rogers helped me on many ECOFIN [Economic and Financial Affairs Council] deals over the years. He is a perceptive, pragmatic & patriotic public servant. Thank you.’
Allies of Mr Cameron, however, privately expressed satisfaction at Sir Ivan’s downfall. Some members of the PM’s inner circle have not forgiven his botched role in the Brexit negotiations, in which he was attacked for being ‘too quick to take no for an answer’.
Tensions between Mr Osborne and Mrs May have been strained since she fired him in July, only hours after becoming PM. Mr Osborne has used Twitter on a number of occasions to take aim at Mrs May.
When Lord Jim O’Neill quit the May Government, he wrote that his ex-colleague ‘was one of those rare things in British politics – an outside expert who made a big difference on the inside. He will be missed.’
Last night Ukip leapt on the resignation of Sir Ivan to make mischief. MEP Gerard Batten said: ‘Perhaps Nigel Farage would consider taking up the post? After all, he ably demonstrated in the referendum campaign that he knows more about the EU than any other British politician.’
Nigel Farage also welcomed Sir Ivan's resignation, adding: 'The Foreign Office needs a complete clear out.'
But EU enthusiasts warned that losing Sir Ivan's experience and knowledge of Brussels dealt a 'body blow' to Britain's hopes of getting a good Brexit deal.   

Sir Ivan did not give a reason for stepping down early and had a good relationship with Mrs May, although his strained relations with pro-Brexit figures in the Cabinet could have been a factor in his decision to quit.  
Sources told the Financial Times that Sir Ivan did not give any reason for his departure but played down his decision, insisting he had decided to leave just a few months before his planned departure date of November.
Downing Street confirmed Sir Ivan has resigned as the UK's ambassador to the EU but refused to give any further details on his reasons for quitting. 
Lord Mandelson, Britain's former EU trade commissioner, suggested he had quit because of undue interference from ministers. 
He said: 'I would not expect him to comment further but everyone knows that civil servants are being increasingly inhibited in offering objective opinion and advice to Ministers. 
'Our negotiation as a whole will go nowhere if Ministers are going to delude themselves about the immense difficulty and challenges Britain faces in implementing the referendum decision.' 
Arch-Remainer Nick Clegg said Sir Ivan's resignation was a 'body blow' to the Government's Brexit plans and attacked Brexit supporters for forcing him out. 
'If the reports are true that he has been hounded out by hostile Brexiteers in Government, it counts as a spectacular own goal,' he said. 
'The Government needs all the help it can get from good civil servants to deliver a workable Brexit.' 
Mr Cameron appointed him to the Brussels post in 2013 after promising a referendum on the EU and he has been a leading advisor to No 10 over the last four years. 
His shock resignation deals a major blow to the Prime Minister's preparations for triggering Article 50 - the formal mechanism for leaving the EU - because of his significant experience and knowledge of Brussels. 
MPs have already started speculating over Sir Ivan's replacement. Mr Rees-Mogg suggested his pro-Brexit colleague Sir Bill Cash should replace Sir Ivan in Brussels, pointing out that Britain appointed a political ambassador - the late Lord Rippon - when we joined the European Community in 1973.
'As a politician was the prime mover on the way in, Geoffrey later Lord Rippon, perhaps someone like Bill Cash should do so on the way out,' he said. 
EU diktats forcing farmers to erect huge pro-Brussels billboards on their land are to be scrapped.
Environment Secretary Andrea Leadsom will pledge to sweep away a raft of EU red tape in the wake of Brexit.
She will tell the Oxford Farming Conference that this red tape is ‘weighing down farmers in mountains of paperwork’ that costs £5million a year and 300,000 man hours.
Mrs Leadsom will also vow to ditch the ‘three crop rule’ which sets out how many different crops farms must plant each year – freeing 40,000 farmers to grow what they like.
Mrs Leadsom, one of the leaders of the Brexit campaign, will tell the conference: ‘For too long, a bureaucratic system which tries to meet the needs of 28 countries has held farmers back. But now, leaving the EU means we can focus on what works best for the UK.
‘Our farmers will finally be free to get on with the job of growing fantastic food in a way that meets our aims of a world leading food industry and a better protected environment. My priority will be common sense rules that work for the United Kingdom.’
Applicants to the Countryside Stewardship scheme, which rewards landowners for work done to protect wildlife and natural landscapes, are required by EU law to meet publicity guidance, which normally involves putting up large pro-Brussels signs.
Measuring as much as 6ft by 4ft for the biggest grants, they must be displayed permanently to avoid a penalty.
The rules also require farmers to set aside 5 per cent of their land for ‘ecological focus areas’ around hedges, ditches and ponds.
Whitehall officials say that, outside of the EU, more ‘common sense definitions’ can be introduced.

Brexit supporters rejoiced his resignation, with Arron Banks, the Leave.EU chairman and Ukip's biggest donor, calling for a diplomat who is more energetically pro-Brexit to replace him. 
He said: 'This is a man who claimed it could take up to 10 years to agree a Brexit deal. 
'He is far too much of a pessimist and yet another of the establishment's pro-EU old guard. He has at least done the honourable thing in resigning.
'It's time now for someone who is optimistic about the future that lies ahead for Brexit Britain. Enough talk, we need to get on with getting out.' 
Ukip's Michael Heaver said Sir Ivan's departure was 'good' and urged Theresa May to appoint a replacement who 'believes in Brexit,' adding that a 'further clear-out' was needed. 
But Europhiles told Brexiteers rejoicing Sir Ivan's departure to 'put champagne on ice'. Jonathan Lis, deputy director of the Europhile British Influence thinktank, warned Britain was losing a knowledgeable, effective representative who was prepared to speak truth to Govt [sic]'. 

Other EU enthusiasts warned that losing Sir Ivan - one of Britain's most experienced negotiators who knows EU institutions and key figures inside out - puts Britain on the back foot ahead of crunch Brexit talks.

Pro-European Sir Nicholas Soames said it was 'really very bad news indeed' and warned that 'we cannot afford to lose people of this calibre and experience'. 
Hilary Benn, Labour MP and chair of the influential Commons Brexit committee, said his resignation was 'not a good thing' and said it was vital the Government ensures a smooth hand-over as soon as possible. 
He told the BBC: 'I think that it means that the Government will have to get its skates on to make sure there is a replacement in place so he or she can work with Sir Ivan in the transition, the handover,' he said.
'But the hard work is going to start very soon, because if Article 50 is triggered, as the Government says it wishes to, by the end of March, then negotiations will probably begin shortly thereafter.




'And having a handover in the middle of that, depending on when exactly he goes, is not ideal.'  
Sir Ivan had come under pressure to resign last month after Eurosceptics claimed Sir Ivan, a former private secretary to ex-Tory chancellor Ken Clarke, was 'scarred' by his time spent negotiating Mr Cameron's failed referendum deal and, as a veteran of Brussels, was 'out of his comfort zone'.
There was also speculation that his warnings of a 10-year trade negotiation with the EU were deliberately leaked to undermine his position.
A ten-year timetable is at odds with the stated position of both Downing Street and Brexit Secretary David Davis.
Mr Davis predicted a deal could be done in 18 months last month, while Number Ten reiterated its commitment to completing the Brexit process in two years. 
'I hope you will continue to challenge ill-founded arguments and muddled thinking and that you will never be afraid to speak the truth to those in power': Sir Ivan's resignation letter in full
Dear All,
Happy New Year! I hope that you have all had/are still having, a great break, and that you will come back refreshed and ready for an exciting year ahead.
I am writing to you all on the first day back to tell you that I am today resigning as Permanent Representative.
As most of you will know, I started here in November 2013. My four-year tour is therefore due to end in October – although in practice if we had been doing the Presidency my time here would have been extended by a few months.
As we look ahead to the likely timetable for the next few years, and with the invocation of Article 50 coming up shortly, it is obvious that it will be best if the top team in situ at the time that Article 50 is invoked remains there till the end of the process and can also see through the negotiations for any new deal between the UK and the EU27.
It would obviously make no sense for my role to change hands later this year.
I have therefore decided to step down now, having done everything that I could in the last 6 months to contribute my experience, expertise and address book to get the new team at political and official level under way. This will permit a new appointee to be in place by the time Article 50 is invoked.
Importantly, it will also enable that person to play a role in the appointment of Shan’s replacement as DPR. I know from experience – both my own hugely positive experience of working in partnership with Shan, and from seeing past, less happy, examples – how imperative it is that the PR and DPR operate as a team, if UKREP is to function as well as I believe it has done over the last few years.
I want to put on record how grateful I am to Shan for the great working relationship we have had. She will be hugely missed in UKREP, and by many others here in Brussels, but she will be a tremendous asset to the Welsh Government.
From my soundings before Christmas, I am optimistic that there will be a very good field of candidates for the DPR role. But it is right these two roles now get considered and filled alongside each other, and for my successor to play the leading role in making the DPR appointment. I shall therefore stand aside from the process at this point.
I know that this news will add, temporarily, to the uncertainty that I know, from our many discussions in the autumn, you are all feeling about the role of UKREP in the coming months and years of negotiations over “Brexit.” I am sorry about that, but I hope that it will help produce earlier and greater clarity on the role that UKREP should play.
My own view remains as it has always been. We do not yet know what the Government will set as negotiating objectives for the UK’s relationship with the EU after exit. There is much we will not know until later this year about the political shape of the EU itself, and who the political protagonists in any negotiation with the UK will be.
But in any negotiation which addresses the new relationship, the technical expertise, the detailed knowledge of positions on the other side of the table – and the reasons for them, and the divisions amongst them – and the negotiating experience and savvy that the people in this building bring, make it essential for all parts of UKREP to be centrally involved in the negotiations if the UK is to achieve the best possible outcomes.
Serious multilateral negotiating experience is in short supply in Whitehall, and that is not the case in the Commission or in the Council. The Government will only achieve the best for the country if it harnesses the best experience we have – a large proportion of which is concentrated in UKREP – and negotiates resolutely. Senior Ministers, who will decide on our positions, issue by issue, also need from you detailed, unvarnished – even where this is uncomfortable - and nuanced understanding of the views, interests and incentives of the other 27.
The structure of the UK’s negotiating team and the allocation of roles and responsibilities to support that team, needs rapid resolution. The working methods which enable the team in London and Brussels to function seamlessly need also to be strengthened.
The great strength of the UK system – at least as it has been perceived by all others in the EU – has always been its unique combination of policy depth, expertise and coherence, message co-ordination and discipline, and the ability to negotiate with skill and determination. UKREP has always been key to all of that. We shall need it more than ever in the years ahead.
As I have argued consistently at every level since June, many opportunities for the UK in the future will derive from the mere fact of having left and being free to take a different path. But others will depend entirely on the precise shape of deals we can negotiate in the years ahead. Contrary to the beliefs of some, free trade does not just happen when it is not thwarted by authorities: increasing market access to other markets and consumer choice in our own, depends on the deals, multilateral, plurilateral and bilateral that we strike, and the terms that we agree. I shall advise my successor to continue to make these points.
Meanwhile, I would urge you all to stick with it, to keep on working at intensifying your links with opposite numbers in DEXEU and line Ministries and to keep on contributing your expertise to the policy-making process as negotiating objectives get drawn up. The famed UKREP combination of immense creativity with realism ground in negotiating experience, is needed more than ever right now.
On a personal level, leaving UKREP will be a tremendous wrench. I have had the great good fortune, and the immense privilege, in my civil service career, to have held some really interesting and challenging roles: to have served 4 successive UK Prime Ministers very closely; to have been EU, G20 and G8 Sherpa; to have chaired a G8 Presidency and to have taken part in some of the most fraught, and fascinating, EU negotiations of the last 25 years – in areas from tax, to the MFF to the renegotiation.
Of all of these posts, I have enjoyed being the Permanent Representative more than any other I have ever held. That is, overwhelmingly, because of all of you and what you all make UKREP: a supremely professional place, with a fantastic co-operative culture, which brings together talented people whether locally employed or UK-based and uniquely brings together people from the home civil service with those from the Foreign Office. UKREP sets itself demanding standards, but people also take the time to support each other which also helps make it an amazingly fun and stimulating place to work. I am grateful for everything you have all done over the last few years to make this such a fantastic operation.
For my part, I hope that in my day-to-day dealings with you I have demonstrated the values which I have always espoused as a public servant. I hope you will continue to challenge ill-founded arguments and muddled thinking and that you will never be afraid to speak the truth to those in power. I hope that you will support each other in those difficult moments where you have to deliver messages that are disagreeable to those who need to hear them. I hope that you will continue to be interested in the views of others, even where you disagree with them, and in understanding why others act and think in the way that they do. I hope that you will always provide the best advice and counsel you can to the politicians that our people have elected, and be proud of the essential role we play in the service of a great democracy. 





By Andrew Pierce 
As a former private secretary to Tory chancellor Ken Clarke, the choice of Sir Ivan Rogers as 'Our Man' at the EU could not have been more provocative for Eurosceptics.
The appointment of Rogers in 2013 by David Cameron also spoke volumes about the former Prime Minister's views on Europe. Rogers also served as chief of staff to the former vice president of the European Commission, the late Lord Brittan.
Clarke and Brittan were both champions of Britain joining the Euro and of ever closer and deeper political integration with Brussels.
Only last week Clarke was the only Tory MP to vote against giving Theresa May the authority to trigger Article 50.
A career civil servant, Rogers also served as principal private secretary to Tony Blair who is talking of making a political comeback to lead the fight to overturn Brexit. At no point has he worked for any opponents of the EU, which is not surprising. He is privately scornful of Euro-sceptics on the Tory benches who he regards as Little Englanders.
While as a civil servant he is supposed to be scrupulously impartial, he makes little secret of the fact he is a fully committed disciple of the school of thought that the UK is better off in the EU whatever its shortcomings.
Mark Ivan Rogers, who looks older than his 56 years, was educated at Balliol College, Oxford. He is married to Stephanie and they have a son and daughter.
He has spent all but five years of his professional life has been spent in the Civil Service. He worked in the City for Citigate heading up their Brussels arm and with Barclays Capital.
He was brought back to Whitehall by Cameron as his EU adviser in 2011 and became UK Representative to the EU in November 2013.
It fell to Rogers to mastermind Cameron's renegotiation with the other 27 EU leaders before the referendum. Even the former prime minister's most ardent supporters concede that their joint efforts were a miserable failure.
Publicity shy, he is conspicuous by his absence from Who's Who, the bible of the great and the good. 
He is rarely seen in photos, never gives interviews, and at summits like yesterday he is usually one step behind ministers or locked away from public view in long technical meetings. Now he's turning his attention to Theresa May's Brexit and, as usual, is spouting doom and gloom. Paid around £170,000 he is earning considerably more than the Prime Minister's £143,000.
But the Brexiteers are warning the PM to treat his advice with caution. An Establishment figure to his finger tips, he is anti-change and does not want to upset the EU leadership who he is instinctively at home with.
For Sir Ivan Rogers, Brexit is not a golden opportunity but a negative to be carefully managed and, if possible, shunted into the sidelines.

 
Rebel MPs warned Theresa May last night that they will change the law to force her to accept whatever Brexit plan they pick tonight.
A series of paper ballots will be held this evening on alternatives to her deal after backbenchers seized control of the Commons timetable in an unprecedented turn of events.
Mrs May has said she will not be bound by the results of these indicative votes, which could demand a soft Brexit.
MPs will be given the chance to say Yes or No to a list of options, which are expected to include staying in a customs union, having a second referendum and even cancelling Brexit altogether.
But the rebels revealed plans last night to take control again on Monday, giving them the opportunity to bring forward legislation forcing Mrs May to act on their preferred plan. 
Tory former minister Nick Boles told BBC Newsnight: ‘If the Government refuses to listen to what Parliament has voted for, we will bring forward a Bill that will require it to reflect Parliament’s wishes.’
Mrs May faced a Cabinet row yesterday over whether to give Tory MPs free votes letting them choose which options they support.
Ministers who want to back a softer Brexit said they might resign if they are whipped against picking choices such as staying in the customs union or single market.
Despite the Government warning that it would set a ‘dangerous, unpredictable precedent’, MPs voted on Monday by a majority of 27 to let backbenchers led by former Tory minister Sir Oliver Letwin seize control of the Commons agenda today.
Under his plan they will hold votes this evening to work out what kind of Brexit has a chance of securing majority support among MPs. 
Commons Speaker John Bercow will pick the options to be on the ballot paper this afternoon, drawn from motions submitted by MPs last night. Eight had been submitted last night.
In one of them, a cross-party group led by Mr Boles, fellow Tory Robert Halfon and Labour MPs Stephen Kinnock, Lucy Powell and Diana Johnson have put forward a Common Market 2.0 plan. 
It would keep the UK in the single market and involve a new customs arrangement, meaning continued freedom of movement and contributions to the EU budget.
Labour MP Gareth Snell has tabled a proposal to negotiate a new customs union with the EU.
Meanwhile, Labour former foreign secretary Dame Margaret Beckett has put forward a motion stating MPs will not sanction Brexit unless it is put to the electorate for a ‘confirmatory vote’.
At 7pm, instead of voting in the division lobbies, MPs will be given slips listing the Brexit options selected by Mr Bercow. 
They will get half an hour to mark Aye or No next to each, with the result expected at around 9pm.
Sir Oliver is planning to seize control of the parliamentary timetable again next Monday so they can repeat the process to narrow down the options or attempt to pass legislation to enforce them.
Labour’s Hilary Benn told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: ‘There will be discussions between MPs. Which are the most popular options? We may then change the system for next week as we are trying to narrow it down.’
Richard Harrington, the former business minister who quit on Monday, said yesterday he expected Mrs May to follow the will of Parliament if a majority was formed for one pathway for Brexit, unless the choice was ‘so off the wall she couldn’t do it’.
‘A responsible Prime Minister... will say, “I would rather have my deal, Parliament’s wish is clearly Norway or customs union or whatever. I will go to Brussels with that, but I’m prepared to put my deal to Parliament against that”,’ he said.
David Davis urged the EU to 'get down to business' today as he kicked off the second round of Brexit talks - but appeared to have turned up without his notes.
The Brexit Secretary sat down with counterpart Michel Barnier for the second round of negotiations in Brussels this morning, saying he wanted to make progress on a deal for reciprocal rights for citizens.
But pictures showed the UK team without any paperwork as they sat across the table from the Eurocrats - who were armed with huge piles of documents. 
After greeting Mr Barnier this morning, Mr Davis insisted the teams from the UK and EU were now getting to the 'heart of the matter'.
'For us it is incredibly important we now make good progress,' he said.
Scroll down for video 
'That we negotiate through this and identify the differences, so that we can deal with them, and identify the similarities so that we can move forward.
'And now it's time to get down to work and make this a successful negotiation.'
Mr Barnier said: 'I look forward to our negotiations this week. We'll now delve into the heart of the matter.
'We need to examine and compare our respective positions in order to make good progress.'
However, Mr Davis only stayed in Brussels for around three hours - before heading back to London and leaving officials to discuss technical details. 
Mr Davis is facing strong opposition from the EU over Britain's proposals for rights of European nationals living in the UK, as well as pressure to accept paying a huge 'divorce' bill.
The first phase of the Brexit talks will cover the divorce settlement - with the main topics reciprocal rights for UK and EU citizens, the potential bill for Britain, and the Northern Ireland border.
David Davis is facing strong opposition from the EU over Britain's proposals for rights of European nationals living in the UK, as well as pressure to accept paying a huge 'divorce' bill.
Theresa May last month published a 'fair and serious' offer to guarantee the future rights of the 3.2 million EU citizens living in the UK and the 1.2 million British ex-pats in the EU.
The proposal to grant EU nationals 'settled status', effectively indefinite leave to remain, was immediately dismissed by European Council President Donald Tusk as 'below our expectations'.
Under the terms agreed between the EU and UK, negotiations are taking place in four-week 'rounds'.
The second session is beginning in Brussels today.
The EU says that only when 'sufficient progress' has been made on citizen's rights, the divorce bill and Northern Ireland will they move on to discuss future trade talks. 


Both sides have committed to 'transparency', and are expected to released updates about each round accompanied by press conferences. 

Theresa May last month published a 'fair and serious' offer to guarantee the future rights of the 3.2 million EU citizens living in the UK and the 1.2 million British ex-pats in the EU.
The proposal to grant EU nationals 'settled status', effectively indefinite leave to remain, was immediately dismissed by European Council President Donald Tusk as 'below our expectations'.
Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson then fanned the flames when he said in the Commons that Brussels could 'go whistle' if it expected the UK to pay a hefty 'divorce bill' in respect of its outstanding financial obligations.
Mr Barnier, who has made clear that he is not prepared to start talks on a trade deal until there has been sufficient progress on the financial settlement, retorted icily he could not hear any whistling, 'just the clock ticking'.
That row was quietly defused with a written Government statement acknowledging Britain had obligations to the EU which would continue after the UK had left and which 'need to be resolved'
However ministers also faced criticism at home over their plans to withdraw from the EU nuclear regulator, Euratom, amid warnings the UK find its access to radioactive isotopes used to treat cancer restricted.
All three issues will be on the agenda for this week's discussions, which are expected to continue to Thursday, along with the thorny matter of the future border between Northern Ireland and the Republic.
Mr Davis made clear his first priority would be resolving the issue of citizens' rights, saying he was determined to make 'real progress'.
'We made a good start last month, and this week we'll be getting into the real substance,' he said.
'Protecting the rights of all our citizens is the priority for me going into this round and I'm clear that it's something we must make real progress on.'
Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson, who is in Brussels on separate business, said: 'A very fair, serious offer has been put on the table by the UK Government about citizenship, the value we place on the 3.2 million EU citizens in our country.
'The, I think, very good offer that we are making to them and the security they can have about their future.
'I hope very much that people will look at the offer in the spirit it deserves.'
The government's approach received a boost today as the Czech secretary of state for European affairs said Britain could get a 'much broader, much deeper' free trade deal with the EU than Canada. 
The government's Brexit approach received a boost today as the Czech secretary of state for European affairs said Britain could get a 'much broader, much deeper' free trade deal with the EU than Canada. 
Ales Chmelar said he hoped there would be a 'mutually agreeable' trade deal and that it could see the UK and EU enjoy closer economic ties than the bloc's Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA) with Canada.

But Mr Chmelar warned that a 'deeper' relationship could also see Britain facing 'certain commitments', suggesting the Government would have to continue paying into the Brussels budget.
 
Ales Chmelar said he hoped there would be a 'mutually agreeable' trade deal and that it could see the UK and EU enjoy closer economic ties than the bloc's Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA) with Canada.

But Mr Chmelar warned that a 'deeper' relationship could also see Britain facing 'certain commitments', suggesting the Government would have to continue paying into the Brussels budget.
Mr Chmelar told BBC Radio 4's Today programme: 'We still hope that there will be a mutually agreeable settlement also on trade issues and we also hope that the UK will have a specific access to the European market, that's something that we have negotiated for example now with Canada, it can be much broader, it can be much deeper.
'And if it is deeper than other settlements, than other trade deals, then it is understandable that there will be also certain commitments.' 
The talks takes place against a backdrop of bitter feuding among UK ministers over the Brexit strategy.
Over the weekend, Chancellor Philip Hammond angrily accused Cabinet rivals of trying to undermine his agenda for a 'softer' business-friendly Brexit prioritising jobs and the economy.
One unnamed Cabinet minister was reported have hit back, claiming Mr Hammond was part of an attempt by 'the Establishment' to prevent Britain ever leaving the EU.
The Daily Telegraph quoted the minister as saying: 'What's really going on is that the Establishment, the Treasury, is trying to f*** it up. They want to frustrate Brexit.'  
A former aide to Mr Gove, Dominic Cummings, risked inflaming tensions today by describing Mr Davis as 'thick as mince'.
Mr Cummings - who helped run the Vote Leave campaign but says he has not spoken to Mr Gove since June last year - also branded Mr Davis 'lazy as a toad' and 'vain as Narcissus'. 
 

 
 

 

 
A couple of weeks ago very few journalists at the BBC or anywhere else had heard about the American procedure of washing chicken in chlorine in order to kill off nasty bugs.
Now it has been firmly established in the view of Remainers that this habit is bad for chickens (although they are, at this juncture, safely dead) and consumers.
The spectre of chlorinated fowl finding their way on to British supermarket shelves has created panic in the anti-Brexit media. Alarm reached a high-water mark on Tuesday evening when Emily Maitlis of BBC2’s Newsnight interviewed the Trade Secretary Liam Fox in Washington. Solemnity was etched into her features, and her questions were delivered with a portentous air.
In her mind — and the minds of other folk at the BBC — chlorinated chicken represents a major threat to post-Brexit Britain. There is even a suggestion that in order to keep this scourge away from our unsullied shores it might be better not to sign a deal with Trump’s America.
It is all fantastic nonsense, of course. Of all the groundless and far-fetched scare stories pumped out by the Remainer brigade over the past 18 months or so, this one should surely take the biscuit.
Dr Fox was not hopeless under assault from Emily. But he wasn’t great. He should have said that the U.S. is by a wide margin Britain’s biggest single trading partner, and that at the latest count Britain enjoys an annual trade surplus of almost £40 billion with our closest ally.
Moreover, although he had already rightly dismissed the chlorinated chicken issue as ‘a detail’, he might have rammed the point home by saying that the import of these supposedly noxious birds will probably account for a fraction of one per cent of UK-US trade.
He might also have invited the disconsolate Emily to celebrate the enthusiasm of President Donald Trump and leading members of his administration for a rapid deal with Britain. That must be a good thing.
Incidentally, would these metropolitan types be so distressed by the thought of washing chickens if Barack Obama were still president? I can’t help thinking that their horror of American poultry has somehow become associated with their conception of Trump as a great Satanic figure.
There are lots of other arguments which collectively drive a coach and horses through the contentions of the hysterical doom-mongers who are attempting to persuade us that an influx of chlorinated chickens is a national nightmare.
Let me first of all point out that America is a rich, well-regulated country. Her consumers are almost certainly even more pernickety and health-conscious than our own. They have been chomping into this stuff without any apparent ill effects.
Nor is it obvious that our EU-approved arrangements are perfect. Various surveys have found that some of our supermarket chickens are riddled with salmonella (the potentially deadly organism which chlorinating is designed to kill) and so anyone taking one of these birds home is running a risk.
I should add that the idea that our standards are higher than those of the allegedly sloppy Americans is pretty hard to swallow. Wasn’t Britain the cradle of BSE (mad cow disease) in the early Nineties?
This arose because cattle (which are herbivores) had been fed the remains of other cattle in meat and bone meal — a disgusting and unnatural practice. Let’s hope we have improved, but we’re hardly in any position to lecture the Americans about food safety.
The same point could be made of the EU, whose officials have been treating Dr Fox as though he has been consorting with the enemy. But while Brussels regards U.S. chickens with such disfavour, it permits the import of sizeable quantities of the birds from Thailand.
Thailand — a semi-developed country with lower standards of hygiene than an advanced economy such as America — is a major exporter of chickens. A large proportion of these find their way to Europe, and a significant number to the UK.
If you have ever bought a chicken microwave meal, or ventured into an Indian, Chinese or Thai restaurant, it is highly likely that you have eaten a chicken that once upon a time clucked away in Thailand. The same holds true if you have bought a chicken sandwich in a High Street shop.
I do not want to cast aspersions on the chicken business in Thailand or drive any hard-working Thais out of business. But given the choice of being a chicken in the United States of America or in Thailand, I know which I would choose.
And I think it highly likely, if not practically certain, that standards of cleanliness are higher in America (even under President Trump) than they are in Thailand.
Yet while the BBC is convulsed with anxiety over washing chickens with chlorine in the U.S., it maintains a lofty lack of interest in the chicken business in Thailand, even though we consume its products.
Emily Maitlis, who will scoot over to Washington at the drop of a hat, is never to be found in Bangkok, picking her way among chicken coops, peering into battery farms, or indeed expressing any interest at all in the welfare of these possibly unfortunate birds.
The explanation, of course, is that the outcry over chlorine is not really about chickens or the well-being of consumers. It is mainly another opportunity to spread panic over Brexit, of which there have been several other recent instances, as the Mail reported yesterday.
One bogus yarn was that leaving Euratom — the European Atomic Energy Community — could affect the transport of radioactive materials used in cancer treatment.
London’s Evening Standard, edited by anti-Brexit propagandist and former chancellor George Osborne, carried a front page headline which read: ‘CANCER PATIENTS IN BREXIT SCARE.’ The BBC made a great deal of fuss, too.
The truth is that Euratom regulates the distribution of fissile material used in nuclear energy, not radioactive isotopes used in cancer treatment. Moreover, lots of non-EU countries have a close working relationship with Euratom.
Once one grasps the machinations behind these scare stories, it is easy to be amused. But many people will have been alarmed by the nonsense over cancer, as they will be by the suggestion that a lot of lethal chlorinated chickens are about to land on us.
By the way, Dr Fox might have pointed out that the water we drink contains minuscule quantities of chlorine. Unless one gets into the habit of eating a couple of American chickens a day, one is likely to consume more chlorine from what comes out of the tap.
No one is saying that we are obliged to accept every American food import without demur. I’m a bit unsettled by the thought of GM crops. That said, Environment Secretary Michael Gove was unwise yesterday to say we wouldn’t accept chlorinated chicken. I’m afraid he’s playing to the gallery. Wouldn’t making it a requirement to label American chicken give consumers the protection they might seek?
The point, as Liam Fox says, is that these are details. Tiny details. We appear to be on the way to signing a crucial deal with our biggest trade partner and the world’s largest economy. It’s puerile and misleading to be banging on about chickens. 
Two boxes of haddock, four days dead and distinctly whiffy from 20ft, stared dolefully from the decks of a Ramsgate fishing boat called Holladays R8.
Like thousands of fish which have to be discarded owing to European Union rules, those haddock were about to be chucked overboard. 
Unlike their fishy friends, they were going to be ditched in the Thames, a few yards from the Houses of Parliament.
One on top of the pile was a ringer, I swear, for Jean-Claude Juncker. Same rheumy eyes. But maybe not quite so thirsty.
You can hurl fish into the sea as much as you like, wasting perfectly good food, and the authorities will not complain. 
Indeed, they will be pleased because you are following EU rules, and if there is one thing the clerical class approves of, it is obedience to rules, no matter how daft. 
But if you drop a few glum haddock corpses into the river outside the Commons terrace, you soon come up against the powers-that-be.
Yesterday's event, held at lowish tide on a bonny March day, was a protest against the Government's transition deal with the EU. 
Our fishing boats are going to remain bound by Brussels rules for a further 21 months after our official departure from the EU.
Some in the fishing industry think there will be a further betrayal in the final departure agreements. 
Whitehall has almost nothing in common with fishing types. They are the sort of people who write facetious remarks on bureaucratic questionnaires. They are – dread word – individuals.
The good tub Holladays (skipper Christopher Attenborough, from Whitstable) chugged under Tower Bridge at breakfast time and was soon preparing to moor at Embankment pier, not far from the Ministry of Defence. 'You can't moor here!' yelled the piermaster. 'Health and safety!'
Nothing to do with him having been told by political bosses to try to stop this protest, then.
Various Conservative MPs had been expected to give a press conference about the haddock-dumping stunt. 
That was before the Tory Whips started fretting. In the event we had to make do, on the bobbing pier, with Jacob Rees-Mogg (NE Somerset), Craig Mackinlay (S Thanet) and Anne-Marie Trevelyan (Berwick-upon- Tweed). 
Good on Mrs Trevelyan. She is a ministerial aide and will have done her immediate career no good by supporting the fishermen.
The trio no doubt said fantastically quotable things. Alas, my hearing is not what it was and the wind and traffic noise and the fact that I was at the rear of the media scrum made them inaudible.
Mr Rees-Mogg had a neatly folded copy of the Financial Times in his hand. He looked more like a man off to his City office than a politician partaking in a spot of populist trouble-making. The pinstriped Poujadiste.
Another Tory MP, Ross Thomson (Aberdeen S), had earlier boarded the Holladays to say that the transition deal was 'unacceptable' on fishing. 
'We want out and we want out now,' said young, sparky Mr Thomson. But he later left the boat and none of his Tory colleagues stepped aboard. The Whips must have been insistent.
Cue the 'Jaws' music. Enter former Ukip leader Nigel Farage. By now we had moved 200 yards up the Embankment to a pier just beside Parliament. 
Capt Farage, in his usual bookie's coat and impish grin, came sauntering down the gangway, coughed up a few ruderies about the EU, and hopped aboard Holladays like a doge leaping into his personal gondola.
The fishing boat, which was by now being shadowed by a police launch, made its way upstream until level with the Commons terrace. Mr Farage and Scots trawlerman Aaron Brown duly threw the haddock overboard, posing for TV cameras as they did so.
At PMQs an hour or so later, Mrs Trevelyan boldly confronted Theresa May on the transition deal, conveying 'the real concern' of her fishing constituents. 
What did Philip Hammond do? He laughed.
Amazon has faced outrage after they sold a Remainer notepad entitled 'My Little Book of All The Brexiteers I Want To Stab' in the same week MPs urged Boris Johnson to temper his language amid fears for their safety over Brexit.
The £4.05 notebook, described as a 'book and journal for Remainers and EU voters', comes amid uproar over the prime minister's use of the term 'Surrender Bill' in Parliament, which prompted MPs to call for calm on all sides of the Brexit debate.   
Amazon customers reacted with disgust over the listing, with one user writing in the review section: 'I hope this has been reported to the police for inciting hate,' before adding that they wanted the publisher to be 'shut down and arrested.' 
Advertising the toxic product, the seller wrote: 'Get this journal/notebook and put a smile on the face of anyone who is against Brexit, who voted Britain to stay, who don't want Britain to leave the European Union!
'This is a great notebook/journal for all anti-Brexit Remainers and Pro-Europeans, Anti Leave British supporters who want Britain to remain in the European Union.'
But angry customers called for the notepad to be removed from the website and the seller banned from Amazon.
Vincent Gallagher wrote: 'Take this is hate speech and encourages violence as an Amazon customer I am disgusted that this is on sale and I will report it to authorities.'
Adrien Priestly added: 'I hope the author gets the same fate as he wants for Brexiteers. Disgusting vile human being. Reported to the police.' 
Marie C said: 'Vile item, inciting hatred and violence, with today's level of knife crime this is disgusting. Reported to the police!' 
Another said: 'Not what this country needs,' while another said 'this is disgusting and I have reported it to The Met Police.'
Another said: 'I've also reported this to the police as incitement of hatred and violence.' 
Tensions heightened this week during a fiery Commons clash as numerous MPs urged Johnson to tone down his Brexit rhetoric as they suggested it was putting their lives at risk. 
Speaker Mr Bercow pleaded with MPs on all sides to calm down as he said the atmosphere in the Commons was 'worse than any I've known in my 22 years in the House'.
Meanwhile, Brendan Cox, murdered MP Jo Cox's widower, said he felt 'a bit sick' after hearing Mr Johnson's remarks and today he was asked how he believed his late wife might have responded.
He said: 'She would have tried to take a generosity of spirit to it and thought about how in this moment you can step back from this growing inferno of rhetoric.'
MailOnline has contacted the Metropolitan Police for comment. 
Amazon confirmed they have removed the book from sale after being alerted to its content by MailOnline. 
Peter Mandelson today provoked outrage by labelling extreme Brexiteers 'nationalists' who 'hate foreigners' and are not 'patriots' like him.
The former EU trade commissioner said the people leading the charge for quitting the EU were 'Brextremists' not motivated by the best interests of the country.
Leave supporters immediately condemned the incendiary remarks as the row over what kind of Brexit Britain will have next year continued unabated into the summer.
Theresa May's efforts to break the Brexit deadlock before MPs broke up for the holidays appeared to fail last week as Brussels rejected her Chequers plan.
Her ministers will spend the summer trying to convince EU capitals of the merits of her proposals, seen by many as a soft Brexit.
But Lord Mandelson said the controversy over the plan, particularly from Brexit supporters, proved the need to have a second referendum on the deal.
These are some of the key features of the Chequers plan being pushed by the UK government:
He told LBC Radio today: 'Patriotism is love of your country. Wanting to stand up for your country, wanting to serve the best interests of your country.
'Nationalism, on the other hand, is a hatred of foreigners - and that's what they are.
'They are nationalists and they should not be confused with patriots.
'I feel I am patriotic. I want the best for Britain - it's why I voted Remain in the referendum though I entirely respect the contrary view of many others.
'These Brextremists are not like that. They are nationalists in the sense that they hate other countries, and they hate foreigners.
'And that is, in my view, what motivates them and drives their behaviour.'
Asked to name who he was describing, Lord Mandelson declined to do so -  but let host James O'Brien name International Trade Secretary Liam Fox and Brexiteer Jacob Rees-Mogg without contest. 
Mr Rees-Mogg told MailOnline: 'Perhaps Lord Mandelson should not confuse truth with fiction.
'It is regrettably something he has had difficulty with throughout his career.'
Former Brexit minister Steve Baker told MailOnline he was 'deeply insulted' by the 'ludicrous' comments.
He said: 'There is nothing illiberal about wanting democracy to have meaning. Quite the reverse.' 
Tory MP Nigel Evans added: 'His incendiary description is an appalling attack.
'He should take his hefty EU pension which hard pressed British taxpayers are guaranteeing and paying post Brexit and go and live in Brussels where he will clearly feel more at home.
'He and his distasteful views will not be missed.' 
In other developments today Downing Street has insisted the Government is engaged in 'good planning' and taking 'sensible precautions' in case there is a no-deal Brexit.
Asked if Theresa May would continue to lead the country if her negotiations fail and the UK is plunged into a no-deal scenario, the Prime Minister's official spokesman said she is 'fully committed to delivering on the will of the British people'.
Ministers have confirmed efforts to stockpile medicines and ensure an 'adequate' food supply if there is a no-deal Brexit.
But Brexiteers have criticised the approach, insisting that, while preparations must be made to show Brussels that the UK could cope without a deal, the plans should not mark a return to the referendum campaign's 'Project Fear'.
Dozens of technical notices setting out what businesses and concerned citizens need to do are expected to be published in August and September.
The Prime Minister's spokesman said: 'We have been absolutely clear that it's in the interests not just of ourselves but the EU to get a deal.
'In the event of no-deal there will of course be consequences for the European Union.'
The spokesman added that the plans are aimed at ensuring an 'orderly' Brexit even if there is no agreement with Brussels.
'We are working towards getting a deal but the Prime Minister is clear that we will put in place all the necessary steps to ensure the UK has a bright future.' 
Theresa May and the EU effectively fudged the Irish border issue in the Brexit divorce deal before Christmas.
But the commitments to leave the EU customs union, keep a soft border, and avoid divisions within the UK were always going to need reconciling at some stage. Currently 110million journeys take place across the border every year.
All sides in the negotiations insist they want to avoid a hard border between Northern Ireland and the Republic, but their ideas for how the issues should be solved are very different.
WHAT THERESA MAY WANTS 
The PM initially backed a 'customs partnership' model, which would see the UK collect tariffs on behalf of the EU - along with its own tariffs for goods heading into the wider British market.
At the Chequers Cabinet summit earlier this month, Mrs May pushed through a compromise plan with elements of both.
It would see the UK follow a 'common rule book' with the EU on goods and collect some tariffs on behalf of Brussels to avoid border friction.
UK courts would also take account of decisions by EU judges. 
It has also been dismissed as 'cherry picking' by Eurocrats.
WHAT BORIS JOHNSON AND THE BREXITEERS WANT 
Brexiteers have been incensed by the Chequers proposal, which they say makes too many concessions and will prevent Britain doing trade deals elsewhere.
They back a 'Maximum Facilitation' scheme would see a highly streamlined customs arrangement, using a combination of technology and goodwill to minimise the checks on trade.
There would be no entry or exit declarations for goods at the border, while 'advanced' IT and trusted trader schemes would remove the need for vehicles to be stopped. 
WHAT THE EU WANTS 
The divorce deal set out a 'fallback' option under which the UK would maintain 'full alignment' with enough rules of the customs union and single market to prevent a hard border and protect the Good Friday Agreement.
The inclusion of this clause, at the demand of Ireland, almost wrecked the deal until Mrs May added a commitment that there would also be full alignment between Northern Ireland and the rest of the UK. 
But when the EU translated this option into a legal text they hardened it further to make clear Northern Ireland would be fully within the EU customs union and most single market rules.
Mrs May says no PM could ever agree to such terms, as they would undermine the integrity of the UK.
WHAT IRELAND WANTSIreland and the EU have presented a united front on the need for a solution to the border issue before any progress can be made on a future trade deal. Leo Varadkar has repeatedly thanked Jean-Claude Juncker and Michel Barnier for their solidarity and vowed that they will not be split by pressure from the UK.  However, economic forecasts have made clear that the Republic could bear the brunt of a massive hit if Britain does not get a trade deal.The UK crashing out on World Trade Organisation (WTO) terms would also mean Ireland facing exactly what it says it is fighting to avoid - the prospect of a hard border.  WHAT NORTHERN IRELAND WANTS 
Polls have suggested support for staying in the EU has if anything increased since then.
But the province is deeply divided across sectarian lines. The dominant DUP backed Brexit, while Sinn Fein is Europhile.
Polls suggest that a majority would vote to keep the UK together rather than for a united Ireland if there was a referendum.
Philip May is a busy man with a career to attend to. He makes very few visits to the Commons. But he made one yesterday and sat in the guests’ gallery alongside a family friend.
The look of loving concern on his face was painful to behold as he watched his wife. Scarcely 30ft away from her, he was ashen.
No wonder. Mrs May looked and sounded awful. Her voice had gone, rather as it did when she made her notorious speech at the Tory party conference 18 months ago.
Don’t misunderstand me. Mrs May was in her way magnificent. With formidable dedication to duty, she took intervention after intervention from MPs from all sides of the house. Gutsy. Heroic. Indomitable.
But by the end she could hardly speak. She relied on her script far more than usual. At times it was as if she was clinging on to it for dear life.
It was telling that she had scant support from many of her treacherous MPs.
Sir William Cash, a life-long Brexiteer, claimed he sympathised with her ailment but then politely trashed her speech.
Over previous days and weeks, Cabinet ministers – most notably the increasingly ambitious Liz Truss – pressed their own personal agendas rather than pulling their weight behind their boss.
There are many in No 10 who feel a deep sense of personal betrayal against Attorney General Geoffrey Cox, who sank her deal when he judged that it included no legal guarantees that Britain could leave the Northern Irish backstop.
Shabbily abandoned by those who had a duty to help her, no wonder at times Mrs May looked finished.
Philip May must have worried about her future, too. He is not just the personal rock and a tower of strength for the Prime Minister. He is a highly intelligent man with a deep understanding of politics and public affairs.
His face hinted at anger over how this proud woman, who has done her best for the people of Britain, has been let down.
She has fought for nearly three years to deliver her vision of Brexit. She has endured insult and abuse, and displayed remarkable physical stamina.
She brought back what was undoubtedly a workable withdrawal agreement from Brussels three months ago, only to see it rejected by the biggest Commons majority in history.
Nobody else could have shown greater commitment or self-sacrifice. On Monday, she made a desperate last-minute dash to Strasbourg to try to win a concession to placate the seemingly implacable hardline Brexiteers in her own party.
And still they unforgivably ganged up with 238 Labour MPs to try to wreck her deal and jeopardise her premiership.
Meanwhile, the clock ticks on.
There’s scarcely two weeks until March 29. What happens now?
Some may say there comes a point where obstinacy turns to cussedness. Where raw courage turns into stupidity. Where staying in office does more harm than good.
It will be a point where Mrs May damages the cause she believes in, the party she leads and the country she governs by blindly clinging on.
Philip May knows better than anyone his wife’s amazing resilience and steadfastness, sustained by her deep and enduring Christian faith.
But he wouldn’t be human if he wasn’t asking himself, what on earth is the point?
Certainly, plenty of others were asking this question at Westminster last night.
After all, it’s long been an article of faith at Parliament that a prime minister who can’t force her or his policies through must quit and make way for someone else who can. Mrs May has only had one Brexit policy. Yet it’s been rejected time and again.
So why hasn’t she resigned? That is becoming an uncomfortably apt question. All the more so since time has run out.
I detect a sense of shock and despair among MPs. Also, a foreboding sense of fear. Events have tumbled out of control.
For my part, I felt that something changed about Brexit yesterday. No longer an abstract concept, it’s becoming very real. The constitutional crisis that has long been predicted is now with us.
And, frighteningly, after last night’s vote there is no plan. Panic is setting in. Nobody can see a way out. MPs and ministers feel trapped without an exit.
Article 50 could be delayed. But why? For what purpose? The EU Commission’s President, Jean-Claude Juncker, has made his final offer. Nothing is going to change. Alternatively, some MPs want another referendum. I am sympathetic. But that creates fresh problems. No one can agree what the question would be.
There’s talk, too, that Mrs May could call a general election. But it would probably not solve anything either.
She could step down. Indeed, many Tory MPs would love it if she did. But the ensuing Conservative leadership election would precipitate fresh chaos. It would create a vacuum at the heart of government lasting weeks – and then what?
Meanwhile, Britain has turned into an international laughing stock. Business is pulling out investment, sterling is falling, the future looks bleak.
In the Commons yesterday, MPs stood around in groups, bemused, baffled and in collective despair.
Can there have been any British prime minister whose policies have been so comprehensively repudiated by Parliament?
To her credit, a defeated, exhausted and visibly upset Prime Minister was on her feet within seconds of the bitter news. Reading from a prepared script, she croaked out two key concessions.
A prime Minister who had refused consistently to rule out a No Deal Brexit told MPs she would allow a vote to rule out a No Deal Brexit. Also, a Prime Minister who has insisted again and again that Britain would leave the EU on March 29 was forced to allow a vote on extending the British departure date.
Two deeply injurious humiliations. But then she came out fighting. She said she personally would vote to block a No Deal – and then ensure that it becomes Government policy.
Of course, this infuriated hardline Brexiteers even more.
In Margaret Thatcher’s last days in No 10, her husband, Denis, told her it was time to go.
He said: ‘You’ve done enough, old girl. You’ve done your share. For God’s sake, don’t go on any longer.’
Philip May has been every bit as loyal to his wife as Denis was to Mrs T.
From his box seat on yesterday’s proceedings in the Commons, he will have realised that Brexit looks certain to be delayed.
But for how long? And, will Europe let us?
After our reckless politicians last night took this country a giant step into the unknown, I wonder whether a similar conversation might soon take place between the Mays as did between the Thatchers. 
During more than 25 years of reporting politics at Westminster, I have seen a great many remarkable and astonishing events.
But never anything remotely like the extraordinary and destructive political typhoon that swirled through the House of Commons last night — leaving chaos behind it.
Such unprecedented and profoundly disturbing events normally signal the death of a government — and the destruction of a prime minister.
Five Cabinet ministers defying a three-line government whip — the most powerful instrument of power any prime minister possesses?
That’s never happened before in living memory.
It is very rare for a Cabinet minister to defy the direct orders of a prime minister — as Labour’s Robin Cook bravely did over the Iraq War before quitting the Blair government.
Humiliating
It’s completely unheard of for a minister to defy a three-line whip and survive.
Yet Welfare Secretary Amber Rudd, Justice Secretary David Gauke, Business Secretary Greg Clark, Energy Minister Claire Perry and Scottish Secretary David Mundell are still in their jobs this morning — despite their open defiance of the Prime Minister and the Government they say they support.
As a result, the minority Tory government was defeated twice on key Brexit votes.
And, despite failing in the most public and humiliating way possible to push her flagship policy through the Commons, Mrs May, too, is still in office this morning.
More precisely, she woke up in her bed in Downing Street. But last night’s events showed that she is in No 10 but not in power — to use the phrase expressed with devastating effect by Norman Lamont about John Major after being sacked as Chancellor in the wake of Britain’s Black Wednesday debacle, when sterling crashed out of the Exchange Rate Mechanism, with interest rates soaring to a terrifying 15 per cent.
Mrs May’s authority is gone. Ministers are contemptuous of her authority. They can rebel against her orders with impunity.
And as a grisly metaphor for her loss of command, the Prime Minister has lost her voice, with a gallant Michael Gove obliged to step in for Mrs May yesterday afternoon.
Some of her MPs were saying that it’s not just her voice she’s lost. She’s lost her hearing as well. And soon she’ll lose her job.
Amid all this debacle, a brutal and deeply unedifying row has broken out within the senior ranks of the Conservative Party as government whips are blaming Downing Street for the shambles.
They are already naming names — Gavin Barwell, the prime minister’s most trusted aide and her Downing Street chief of staff. It was reported last night that the whips are ‘incandescent’ that Downing Street officials gave Cabinet ministers the nod that they could defy instructions and vote with a rebel amendment blocking a No Deal Brexit.
In other words, blood is on the carpet. There’s been a disgraceful breakdown of trust. An outbreak of civil war at the very top of the Conservative Party.
For the past few months, Theresa May has been desperately battling to prevent the pro-European wing on one side and the ultra-Brexiteers on the other side of the Tory Party from breaking apart. Last night, it was even worse: she faced mutiny. And she lacked the strength and authority to face it down. She gave in to the rebels and there is now a huge price to pay.
Weak though she is, there’s no sign Mrs May will quit despite enduring countless humiliations and defeats.
Cats have nine lives. Mrs May has enjoyed more. Many more.
Incredible though it sounds — don’t rule her out from emerging from this latest crisis.
Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn and his shadow ministers keep on saying that Mrs May’s Brexit deal is finished.
I am not so sure. Despite last night’s shambles, Mrs May still holds some cards.
And although her deal is unquestionably on life support in the emergency ward, the switch has not yet been turned off.
There is a chance of revival.
I believe that for all the chaos and confusion of the past 48 hours, a way forward could develop.
Consider the facts. Yesterday morning, Theresa May woke up in the knowledge that her EU withdrawal deal had been voted down in the Commons by a massive 149 votes.
Feuding
Pausing only to take medication for her racking cough, she went straight into an early morning emergency Cabinet meeting to discuss the possible consequences if the Government was defeated again, in last night’s vote.
Those who witnessed ministers emerge from that session tell me that they looked tired, almost broken and deeply depressed.
There then followed what must have seemed to the Prime Minister a blissful respite: the Chancellor’s spring statement on the state of the economy.
Normally this is one of the major events of the year. This time it was all but completely overshadowed by the Brexit chaos.
And by early afternoon it was back to Brexit, with Michael Gove — one of the most ardent Brexiteers — standing in for Mrs May.
By 7pm, the rebellion was under way, government was in chaos, and feuding had broken out at the very top.
To many voters, this must all seem totally mad and out of touch with the realities of their daily lives.
Even someone such as me, well versed in the craziness of Westminster, finds it hard to comprehend what is going on.
Blackmail
But curiously enough, this is what I predict could happen.
It now looks likely that the Prime Minister will use last night’s events to terrify her Brexiteer opponents into submission.
She will effectively blackmail them by saying that if they continue to cause trouble Brexit will not happen after all.
It’s far too soon to be certain but it seems highly likely that the Prime Minister will rise from her sick bed to put her deal before MPs in a so-called ‘meaningful vote’ for the third time next week.
And that she will threaten them that if they vote her down again, Brexit itself will be kicked into the long grass.
Not just a delay of a few weeks to Article 50 of the kind that has been discussed up to now. But a delay of two years or more.
Reassuringly, at last, there are signs that Mrs May’s diehard opponents are about to give in.
They are learning the hard way that you underestimate this very formidable lady at your peril.
The last British Foreign Secretary to resign was Lord Carrington — 36 years ago — in the aftermath of the Argentine invasion of the Falklands in 1982.
Peter Carrington’s departure is widely regarded as the most honourable resignation of modern times — he took full responsibility for failing to foresee Argentina’s intentions.
It has to be admitted that Boris Johnson’s rushed decision to quit office yesterday lunchtime lacked the grace and gravitas of Lord Carrington’s departure.
Johnson hung on too long. He should have stepped down late on Friday, when Mrs May unveiled her negotiating position over Europe during that fateful all-day Cabinet meeting at Chequers.
But his departure is in its way as principled as Lord Carrington’s — and as his devastating resignation letter demonstrates, infinitely more dangerous for the Prime Minister.
It could prove lethal for her. This is a letter written not just to save his own integrity — it is also a relentless attack on Mrs May.
Most ministerial resignation letters carry a word of praise and expressions of personal warmth for the Prime Minister. None of that from Johnson.
Most resignation letters contain a bland promise to be a loyal servant from the backbenches. Johnson’s letter is devoid of any such assurance.
It looks very much to me as if he is preparing his way to mount a challenge to the Tory leadership.
Sooner rather than later.
Crucially, the letter carries strong echoes of Sir Geoffrey Howe’s notorious resignation speech in the Commons which propelled Margaret Thatcher from office in 1990. He accuses Mrs May of ‘sending our vanguard into battle with the white flags fluttering above them’.
That phrase is almost identical to Geoffrey Howe’s accusation that — also in negotiations with Europe — Thatcher had sent the Chancellor and Governor of the Bank of England into bat with broken cricket bats.
Indeed, if Sir Geoffrey were still alive he could sue Boris Johnson for plagiarism. 
With its lethal accusation that the Prime Minister is set on converting Britain into a ‘colony’, the letter also conveys Johnson’s sense of deep despair at May’s handling of negotiations with the European Union.
It is plain why Johnson could not remain inside the May Government while supporting a clean Brexit.
If Johnson is indeed planning to challenge May, though, he would be foolhardy to be impetuous and strike too soon. That would result in accusations of treachery.
Yet there is no doubt in my mind that if Theresa May suffers from a vote of no confidence by her MPs, the only logical course of action from the former Foreign Secretary is that he should mount a challenge.
Johnson and May are clearly divided by a massive conflict in their vision of Britain’s relationship with Europe. Their views on this are completely incompatible.
The letter shows clearly that trust between the two has broken down irreparably.
This became all the more apparent when it emerged that Downing Street — which Boris yesterday had warned in advance he would resign that evening — brutally and dishonourably leaked the news before he had even had time to write his resignation letter.
Over the next few days, Mr Johnson will face a barrage of contempt, hostility and criticism from supporters of the Prime Minister’s strategy on Europe. He will be accused of betrayal, opportunism, selfishness and also incompetence.
Plenty will revel in trashing the colourful former Foreign Secretary’s reputation. But I will not be among them.
I worked on The Spectator political magazine when he was its editor 15 years ago and can testify that far from being an opportunist, Mr Johnson was principled then and remains so now. Not least when it came to Europe.
His political opponents claim that his opposition to the European Union during the Brexit referendum campaign two years ago was a clever ruse to gain him popularity and help him become leader of the Conservative Party.
Rubbish. Mr Johnson has a record of criticising the EU dating back to the Nineties.
He will now become the de facto leader of opposition to Theresa May within the Tory Party. And I believe he could be formidable in that new role.
He has an acute political mind matched by remarkable eloquence as a speaker and writer.
Indeed, it may be that Mr Johnson will find his rhetorical flights better suited to the backbenches than to the sober responsibilities of Government.
Whatever his critics say, though, there were many achievements in Mr Johnson’s short time at the Foreign Office. Contrary to widespread reports, he was admired by officials who respected his ability to grasp a brief.
At all times he conveyed a buoyant optimism and he was certainly a massive improvement on his humdrum predecessor Philip Hammond.
He sought to preserve and enlarge Britain’s influence for good in the world, rather than accept and manage its decline.
I would also rate him higher as Foreign Secretary than the former Tory leader, dithering and gutless William Hague.
Mr Johnson made serious efforts to bring an end to the Syrian conflict and to keep afloat the special relationship with the United States at an exceptionally difficult time.
He deserves credit for the way Britain mustered European solidarity and support for Britain in the wake of the poisoning of former Russian spy Sergei Skripal and his daughter Yulia in Salisbury earlier this year. 
While maintaining a level head, Mr Johnson played an energetic and effective role in bringing the European Union round to Britain’s position that Russia was the most likely culprit of the attack.
He was also the first Foreign Secretary in recent memory to re-engage with the Commonwealth, an institution which has been systematically neglected by the Foreign Office.
The Commonwealth conference in London in April was a conspicuous success.
Equally striking was Boris Johnson’s courageous refusal to allow Theresa May and Philip Hammond to have it all their own way on Brexit. When other Brexiteers kept their head down, Johnson persistently spoke out for his vision of a clean Brexit — and of course it was this persistence and his refusal to budge that eventually led to his resignation.
It was he, for instance, who drafted many of the key sections of the Lancaster House speech last year which committed Mrs May to leaving the key institutions of the European Union.
And the sadness is that he was beginning to find his feet at the Foreign Office.
I believe he could have gone on to become one of Britain’s most respected Foreign Secretaries.
True, Mr Johnson failed to do anything to prevent two great crises on his watch.
The first is in Yemen, where millions of people are threatened with starvation in the greatest humanitarian catastrophe of the 21st century.
Nor did he take any meaningful action to halt the genocide inflicted on the Rohingya Muslims by the Myanmar government, which came to a brutal head in two weeks of cold-blooded killing and rape last autumn.
From today he has a new role as he turns into Mrs May’s most dangerous critic and opponent.
From now on he will no longer wish to be seen simply as a former Foreign Secretary.
Rather he will position himself as a leader of the Brexiteers and a potential future Prime Minister.
And to convince people he is serious, he will have to rise above the inevitable slurs against him and present his vision for our country’s independent future with boldness, clarity — and his customary eloquence. 
No modern British prime minister got off to a worse start than the one Boris Johnson is suffering.
For a man who said at the age of four that he wanted to be ‘world king’, the reality of the challenges of being in power must be quite a shock.
To be fair, he looked good for the first few weeks. His fluent and optimistic oratory was a welcome change from Theresa May’s debilitating leadership.
And Johnson’s debut overseas trip as PM was a notable success. He appeared to strike up a strong relationship with German Chancellor Angela Merkel and looked comfortable as he engaged with French President Emmanuel Macron.
This week, however, Bulldozer Boris hit a wall. One catastrophe struck after another.
He was condemned for suspending Parliament. His Commons majority sunk from one to minus 43 amid the bloodbath when 21 Tory MPs were ruthlessly sacked.
He lost four consecutive Commons votes. Humiliatingly, he failed to secure a general election, having lost control of a parliament that defied his will and also legislated to make it impossible to achieve a No Deal Brexit.
Devastatingly, his well-regarded brother, Jo, walked out of his Government and from politics altogether — blaming an unresolvable divide ‘between family loyalty and the national interest’.
This was a deadly retort, for it implied he believes his elder brother is not governing in the national interest. No more wounding charge can be levelled at a prime minister.
On a personal level, Johnson has started to appear dishevelled — using a four- letter word at Prime Minister’s Questions and giving an uncharacteristically stumbling performance in front of police recruits in Yorkshire.
There is no avoiding the question: how does Boris Johnson save himself?
I once worked for Johnson when he was editor of The Spectator magazine and I its political columnist. He was charming, intelligent, generous and loyal. Back then, he would take full responsibility if ever things went wrong.
Now that things are going wrong with his leadership of the country, he must shoulder the blame.
But others, too, ought to take some responsibility for what is going wrong. Jeremy Corbyn is hugely complicit in causing the crisis because of his hypocrisy in refusing to honour his repeated calls for a general election and, therefore, support the Government’s Commons motion that would have led to one.
But, admittedly, it is in the Labour leader’s interests to watch Johnson fail.
That said, it is the Tories who are in government, and they are most at fault. Principal culprit is Dominic Cummings, Johnson’s chief adviser. Through his boorishness, bullying and strategic blundering, his boss has lost control of events. He has also managed to unite what was previously a disunited band of Remainers into a well-organised anti-Johnson coalition that is being marshalled successfully by Corbyn.
So much for Cummings’s supposed tactical genius! The architect of the 2016 Leave campaign should leave Johnson’s Government forthwith.
Also to blame is Johnson’s much-vaunted constitutional expert, Nikki da Costa.
She quit Theresa May’s Government as director of legislative affairs at No 10, but is now back in the same job.
She was intimately involved in the disastrous decision to prorogue Parliament.
It was her note to Johnson on August 15 asking if he wanted a shutdown that led him to order one, with him casually replying that the session in September was a ‘rigmarole’ that only existed ‘to show the public that MPs are earning their crust’.
Another of whom better was expected is Johnson’s long-term chief of staff, Sir Edward Lister.
‘Steady Eddie’ — a 69-year-old former London council chief — should have helped avoid the pitfalls.
Questions are being asked, too, about Cabinet Secretary Sir Mark Sedwill, whose duty is to be the guardian of government integrity.
If Johnson is to regain his poise, he needs a new set of advisers. But he must do much more.
The decision to strip the Tory whip from 21 MPs who voted with Labour this week has been a disaster and must be reversed, however humiliating that would be to the Prime Minister.
Otherwise, I fear more will follow Jo Johnson, the Tory party will fall apart and it will lose the next general election. Significantly, the approximately 100-strong One Nation group of Conservative MPs is becoming restless.
On Wednesday, it authorised its chairman, former Cabinet minister Damian Green, to send a letter to Boris Johnson protesting against the purge of moderate colleagues — when the 21 MPs were sacked from the party.
Green, a long-time friend of Theresa May, added tellingly that if the PM’s aim was to unite the Tory party and the country, removing the whip from the MPs has ‘hindered that mission’.
There is no doubt that a number of Cabinet ministers have been shocked by Boris Johnson’s brutal methods.
Work and Pensions Secretary Amber Rudd and Culture Secretary Nicky Morgan were both part of the One Nation group meeting that led to the letter to Johnson.
Maybe this political forest fire will die away over the next few days.
Or maybe the flames will grow in intensity and spread.
But my advice to Boris Johnson is now to heed the One Nation Tories’ counsel.
Dominic Cummings must go. Great parliamentarians such as Ken Clarke and Sir Nicholas Soames must be welcomed back into the Tory fold.
Better and less divisive advisers must urgently be hired.
I’ve always believed that Boris Johnson has the qualities to be a fine prime minister.
To be fair to him, he is facing an extreme set of circumstances that are on a scale none of his predecessors ever had to deal with.
But he needs to act very fast, or his childhood dream of being ‘world king’ — or even just of running Britain — will be shattered.
Boris shows the diplomatic touch  
Despite the Brexit shambles, Boris Johnson deserves praise for his wise statesmanship over the Iran crisis.
Rather than escalate tensions following the seizure of an Iranian tanker in Gibraltar, which triggered Iran to seize a British-flagged tanker in the Strait of Hormuz, Johnson ordered the release of the Iranian ship. As a result, the Tehran regime freed seven crew members from the vessel it impounded.
Johnson also wisely rejected calls by Israel to keep the pressure on Iran.
He has learnt from his time as Foreign Secretary, when he foolishly compromised the safety of British-Iranian citizen Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, who is in an Iranian prison.
I believe that a settlement with Iran can be reached which would see her released, in return for Britain finally paying a £450 million debt owed to Iran from an arms deal in the Seventies.
All thanks to Boris Johnson’s enlightened diplomacy.
Ultimately, the man who bears responsibility for the Brexit crisis is David Cameron. The former prime minister called the referendum — to stop losing hardline anti-EU Tory voters to Ukip — and failed to negotiate with Brussels a better deal for Britain.
It was he who put on the statute book the ill-conceived Fixed-term Parliaments Act, which has now caused political paralysis and sorely tested our system of democracy. And it was Cameron who resigned as PM straight after the Brexit vote, despite promising that he would stay on to deal with its fallout. Now, as he surveys the debris he created, he has the audacity to publish and promote his memoirs. To his credit, though, after reports that the former PM got an £800,000 advance, The Bookseller magazine says all author profits will go to charity. But shouldn’t Cameron have delayed publication until after Brexit was solved?
 
The bloodiest day in British politics since World War II. At Westminster they were calling it the Midsummer Massacre.
With a casual brutality of which I had not thought him capable, Boris Johnson has systematically cut short the political careers of more than a dozen Cabinet ministers.
No contrition. No remorse. He simply scythed them down.
Al Capone, the gangster notorious for his drive-by shootings, would have given Johnson a nod of professional approbation and lifelong membership of his Chicago Street Boys Gang.
How telling that Johnson recently told the Mail that his favourite film scene was — to quote his words — ‘the multiple retribution killings at the end of The Godfather.’
Sacking
But he refrained from adding that he planned to treat Francis Ford Coppola’s movie classic as a political textbook rather than as an evening’s entertainment.
The stark truth is that Boris Johnson is sending out a blunt political message. He wants ultra-loyalists around him. And only ultra-loyalists.
It’s not good enough just to be a Brexiteer. He only wants Brexiteers who are loyal to him.
All must be signed up to the Mafia code of ‘Omerta’ under which it is shameful to betray colleagues and principles.
Hence, for example, the totally unexpected sacking of Penny Mordaunt from her job as Defence Secretary.
Ms Mordaunt, who many predicted might be promoted to the Foreign Office, is a passionate Leaver. But she made the fatal mistake of backing Jeremy Hunt to be PM.
The same is true of the former Secretary of State for International Trade, Liam Fox. I cannot stress too strongly how much Boris Johnson’s actions yesterday represents a breach from all known parliamentary and political convention.
Traditionally, any new Conservative (or Labour) leader comes into office seeking to heal rifts in their party by offering jobs to opponents.
Margaret Thatcher was careful to include many so-called political ‘wets’ who disdained her hard-line policies.
At a stroke, Johnson has rewritten the rules of politics.
He’s done nothing to heal divisions that have rent the Tory party for so long. What’s more, he’s gone out of his way to create new enemies.
The biggest breach in convention concerns Jeremy Hunt, who fought a valiant battle in the Conservative leadership contest.
Observers were expecting him to be rewarded with a promotion to the Chancellorship or, at the very least, that he would keep his job as Foreign Secretary — one of the three great offices of state under the Prime Minister.
Johnson had no time for that kind of traditional generosity and decorum.
First, he attempted to humiliate Hunt by forcing him to take a demotion to Secretary of State for Defence. When Hunt refused to budge, Johnson simply sacked him.
Until now, Harold Macmillan held the record for Cabinet sackings. He got rid of seven ministers on the so-called ‘Night of the Long Knives’ in 1962.
Butcher Boris has made Macmillan look like a toddler with a plastic picnic knife.
The political strategy behind this slaughter is obvious, though audacious in the extreme.
Johnson is making plain there can be no room for backsliders as he wrenches Britain out of the European Union by October 31.
He only wants new true Brexit-Boris believers. And the punishment for disloyalty is political extinction.
He has sent out the signal that he means to lead not through persuasion, as has become the norm in our age of consensual politics, but through fear.
The great risk is that he has created an army of enemies on the Tory backbenches.
Of course, all prime ministers gradually create enemies through a long process of attrition while in office. Johnson, though, has gone out of his way to create a new platoon all at once.
Forget the blithe words of tribute to Theresa May — mentioning her ‘fortitude and patience’ and her ‘deep sense of public service’ — this marks a total repudiation of her and her system of government.
After that modicum of praise, he sacked her ministers, trashed her government and witheringly condemned its inability to achieve Brexit.
He seems to have concluded from her failure that the Parliamentary Conservative Party won’t allow Brexit.
Command
So he’s decided that his own MPs, and the conventions which govern the party, are a lost cause.
His motto: follow me or face the sack.
Above all, Johnson knows that he cannot command a natural majority in the Commons. His solution?
It is to threaten Parliament with the will of the people.
Yesterday, he repeatedly referred to the ‘will of the people’ — ironically in view of his plan to break away from a political and economic union with France, this is a concept dating back to the French political philosopher Jean- Jacques Rousseau and which has been repudiated by British constitutional doctrine.
Typically, Johnson is positioning himself as a revolutionary Prime Minister.
Donald Trump repeatedly summons popular support in his battle against congress. Johnson will follow suit in an attempt to undermine an oppositional Parliament.
Vital in this attritional war will be a cohort of Godfather-style consigliere.
Among these appointments is Dominic Cummings — seen by many as a sinister schemer.
Despised
This backroom tactician — now Johnson’s special adviser — is probably best known for being played by Benedict Cumberbatch in the Channel 4 film Brexit: The Uncivil War.
The strategic genius behind the Vote Leave campaign was recently found in contempt of Parliament for failing to appear before the Culture, Media and Sport select committee and is despised by many MPs.
Ultimately, I believe Johnson’s decision to declare war on the Parliamentary Conservative Party means that he will have little choice but to call a General Election soon.
I am sure it would be fought on the theme of The People versus Parliament.
Johnson’s calculation is that disloyal Tory MPs would be terrified into submission.
Having witnessed the chaos of the past three years, Boris Johnson will stop at nothing to force through Brexit.
Many will agree that such defiance of convention is necessary considering that our politics have become paralysed.
Others, though, will be horrified.
It’s a brave strategy — and it may be Brexit’s best hope. But it may also break the Conservative Party.
Despite his numerous weaknesses and failings, Jeremy Corbyn has, for decades, offered one admirable quality to voters. That of being a politician of undoubted authenticity.
This has meant that, by the admittedly dismal standards of modern politicians, he has stood out as a man of principle. Indeed, that is one of his main attractions to young voters.
However, all that was blown to smithereens yesterday.
His speech about Labour’s Brexit policy was, I believe, one of the most cynical, calculating and amoral pieces of so-called oratory I have ever heard from a politician.
Several times as I listened, I had to pinch myself as he made the case for Britain to stay a member of an EU customs union.
Here was the neo-Marxist, who has made it his life’s work to fight capitalism, placing himself in the same camp as the bosses’ organisation (the CBI), the Financial Times and the Bank of England.
Corbyn’s sudden alliance with big business goes against every bone in his body.
For, as recently as December, he railed against City ‘speculators and gamblers’ who are part of a ‘damaging and failed system that’s rigged for the few’.
Not only does his new policy of cosying up to big business betray his own personal principles, it is a slap in the face of those millions of Labour voters who want Britain to break from the Brussels straitjacket and who voted Brexit in the EU referendum.
Undoubtedly, they will see Corbyn as a traitor.
That is surely the view of Labour MP Frank Field — regarded by many as the most honourable MP in Parliament.
Field warned at the weekend that if Corbyn said a Labour government would keep Britain in an EU customs union after 2020, he would ‘rat on the people’s decision to leave’.
How ironic that Corbynistas hate Tony Blair for what they say is his hypocrisy and two-facedness. And yet, those are the same characteristics their hero showed yesterday.
The brutal truth is that on the great issue of our time, Jeremy Corbyn has played Judas to democracy.
This, remember, is the same man who voted for Britain to leave the European Economic Community (which preceded the EU) in 1975; who opposed the creation of the EU under the Maastricht Treaty (turning the EU into more of a superstate); who voted for a referendum on our membership of the EU, and the day after the vote itself called for the immediate invocation of Article 50 — the two-year notice to leave the EU.
Of course, Corbyn’s screeching U-turn is down to dirty politics rather than principles. He is positioning himself, as leader of the Opposition, to try to bring down the Government.
In sum, he has sacrificed his reputation for integrity in the hope he can destroy Theresa May’s premiership.
Central to his calculation is that if he succeeds in getting rid of Mrs May and becomes prime minister himself, Labour supporters who voted for Brexit would forgive him.
They would do so, he thinks, because they would prefer a Labour government (albeit still shackled in part to Brussels) than a Tory government that has broken free from Brussels.
This, I reckon, is how Corbyn hopes his plan will work out.
Later this year, MPs will have to vote on the Government’s deal on leaving the EU.
Corbyn believes he might be able to muster the support of sufficient rebel Remainer Tories to defeat Mrs May.
Already, one, Anna Soubry, has tabled a potentially deadly amendment calling for Britain to remain in a customs union — precisely the policy adumbrated yesterday by Corbyn.
For her part, Soubry makes no secret of the fact that her desire to see Britain still shackled to the Brussels-based trading bloc is stronger than her loyalty to Mrs May.
Thus, Corbyn is cynically calculating that he can form an anti-democratic alliance with Europhile Tories and the Scottish Nationalists (who have 35 MPs) to topple the Tory Government. This is a life-and-death gamble.
Of course, there are precedents. In some ways, it is similar to the way the then Labour leader John Smith behaved over the Maastricht Treaty in 1993.
Although a passionate Europhile, Smith joined Prime Minister John Major’s Tory anti-European ‘bastard’ rebels in an attempt to bring down his government.
Although Smith narrowly failed, Major was so badly damaged that he never truly recovered.
Corbyn hopes to go one stage further, take down Mrs May and be in 10 Downing Street by Christmas.
I believe, however, that his audacious gamble will backfire.
Principally because the British people won’t let him unseat a government which is nobly carrying out the democratic wishes of the majority of the electorate.
Also, because people will see through Jeremy Corbyn’s amoral sell-out.
On the specifics of the argument, too, the Labour leader is intellectually flawed. He misunderstands the details.
For example, if Britain retains some trading rights with the EU, we would have to accept the terms put forward by Brussels — and that almost certainly would mean allowing practically unrestricted immigration from other European countries.
In any case, each of the remaining 27 EU countries would have to vote to accept the terms of a deal that a Corbyn-led British government would ask for with regard to a customs union.
Undoubtedly, countries such as Poland and Hungary, which want their peoples to travel freely across continental Europe, would try to force Britain to allow their citizens to come here freely.
This would mean that the UK would not regain control of its borders and immigration levels would remain high.
Yet countless studies have shown that it was worries about high levels of immigration from EU countries which were a key factor in so many Labour supporters backing Brexit in June 2016.
For them, Corbyn’s speech yesterday was a betrayal — and one which they will find hard to forgive.
There is another issue. This is that a trigger for the Brexit vote was that people wanted Britain to be free from Brussels’s crippling tariffs on non-EU goods.
These mean that foods imported from outside the EU are artificially priced much higher than they ought to be.
Similarly, Brussels keeps prices high by paying billions of euros in subsidies to French and German farmers, leading to higher costs for European consumers — including, of course, hard-pressed Labour voters — and making it much more difficult for farmers in the Third World to get access to the European market.
Ultimately, Jeremy Corbyn’s speech may prove to be a momentous one in the history of the Labour Party — but not for the reason he would have wanted.
I believe that he risks losing from the party a hardcore of its traditional supporters, particularly in the Midlands and North — around 30 per cent of its total support — who voted Brexit but feel they could never vote for a party that wants to keep Britain locked into parts of an EU superstate. 
Every day, the road to Brexit seems to get bumpier. The mixed messages coming from Downing Street certainly don’t help.
The latest confusion was caused when, on the one hand, the Government’s Chief Whip, Julian Smith, said he plans to bring the EU (Withdrawal) Bill back to the Commons for a vote earlier than expected, in a move that pleased Brexiteers who want to face down Remain MPs as soon as possible.
However, on the other hand, Downing Street was briefing that the Government may give hope to Remainers by asking the EU for a second Brexit transition period to run until 2023.
No wonder so many of the 17.4 million who voted Leave are getting deeply frustrated.
But while Brussels negotiators continue to stymie Brexit, European politicians are facing a much bigger threat to the European Union.
I refer to events of the past few days in Italy, which will be Europe’s third largest economy after Britain leaves the European Union.
This week, a new government was formed — Italy’s 66th since the end of World War II.
The new prime minister, Guiseppe Conte, heads a rag-bag coalition of the anti-Establishment Five Star Movement and the far-right League.
They agree on very little but there is one policy on which they are in harmony: a hatred of Brussels.
It is no exaggeration to say that Mr Conte, a former law professor at Florence University, has the power to bring about the collapse of the EU.
He came to power on a wave of burning national resentment over Italy’s membership of the EU, which millions of Italians believe has been an unmitigated disaster for their country.
Above all, there is the problem of immigration, which was a key issue in March’s elections.
Brussels’s freedom of movement rules are blamed for record numbers of migrants in the country.
At least one million, for example, have settled in Italy from Romania, a fellow EU member. But huge numbers have made their homes in Italy after crossing the Mediterranean from North Africa.
From Libya alone in the past four years, an estimated 600,000 migrants and refugees have reached Italy.
These people know that once on Italian soil, they have a very good chance of being able to begin a new life there or exploit freedom of movement to live in any other of the 28 countries in the EU.
Italy’s new government has pledged to deport up to half a million migrants, to clear illegal gipsy settlements in towns and cities, and to recruit more police and build new prisons to deal with the problems.
This hardline reaction to Brussels’s soft approach to illegal immigration amounts to a huge challenge to its authority and imperils the cohesion of the EU.
But immigration is not the only issue over which Italy’s new government is at war with Brussels.
The country, once an economic success story almost as remarkable as Germany’s, has been brought to its knees by Brussels.
This tragedy dates back to Italy’s decision to join the euro at its launch in 1999. It proved to be a calamitous error.
With its own currency, the lira, the Italian government was able to manage its own affairs and devalue its currency if necessary to make itself competitive.
However, the euro has imposed a financial strait-jacket which has led to the closure of thousands of businesses, with millions of people put out of work.
Shockingly, Italy has not seen any cumulative economic growth since it signed up to the European single currency.
The Italian people know that their membership of the EU is to blame for mass unemployment, social collapse and uncontrolled migration. The new Italian PM, Mr Conte, is the first political leader to genuinely represent the national mood of outrage — and sorrow — at their post-lira impoverishment.
Italy’s national debt is a staggering 132 per cent of its Gross Domestic Product — the second highest in the EU, after Greece.
To try to prevent a crisis of ever bigger proportions, the European Central Bank lent Italy €600 billion (about half a trillion pounds sterling) in order to stop it going bankrupt.
Meanwhile, Mr Conte is promising tax cuts and public spending increases to try to undo the damage to his country’s economy.
As night follows day, though, the Brussels bully-boys — the same ones who have been trying to block Brexit — will threaten him with dire consequences unless he backs down.
We witnessed a similar stand-off when Greece’s economy hit the rocks and had to be bailed out with billions of euros in loans from Brussels.
The Greek people reacted to this national humiliation by voting for a vehemently anti-EU government three years ago.
But they were then shabbily let down when their new prime minister, Alexis Tsipras, abjectly caved in to the strong-arm tactics of European leaders.
Mr Conte is unlikely to yield in the same way.
Italy is ten times bigger than Greece. Unlike Greece, Italy is too big to fail.
It is quite possible that Mr Conte will threaten that Italy will pull out of the euro — a move that would instil terror in Brussels and Frankfurt.
Returning to the lira would be a desperate measure, but it would be the economically sane thing to do.
It would give the Italian economy a chance to be competitive again and end the stagnation and mass unemployment which have wrecked countless hundreds of thousands of lives over two decades.
Leaving the euro would mean that Italy would renege on its €600 billion in loans from the European Central Bank.
Without doubt, the bank would collapse. The EU would go into financial and political meltdown.
The ineluctable truth is that Italy is now a ticking time bomb, and I fear it is only a question of time before it explodes, with consequences for the continent which are impossible to predict.
How ironic that the founders of the EU’s predecessor, the EEC, were driven in part by a desire to prevent a repeat of the terrible bloodshed of the two great wars of the 20th century, but their hubristic attempts at political and economic union have instead created division and hatred.
Europe is not just creaking — it is falling apart.
Is it any surprise the British people had the good sense to vote to leave the EU?
The worrying message: Britain approves torture 
Two weeks have passed since Theresa May apologised for the Blair government’s role in the kidnap and torture of Libyan dissident Abdul Hakim Belhaj.
Mrs May was not to blame for this repugnant case. The two men most responsible were then Foreign Secretary Jack Straw and MI6 official Sir Mark Allen.
Yet Straw remains a Privy Councillor and Allen keeps his knighthood. Both men have brought shame on Britain, and if they aren’t stripped of their honours it will suggest that the British State approves of torture.
One of the fiercest critics of the Prime Minister’s handling of Brexit has been the Institute of Directors, the organisation representing Britain’s most senior business people.
What a pity that it cannot handle its own affairs. Membership has almost halved from 55,000 in 2005 to just over 30,000 today.
Theresa May’s formidable speech to the Tory Party conference barely two weeks ago ought to have put paid to all leadership speculation for the foreseeable future.
But, sadly, the knives are being sharpened again.
This time, it’s not Boris Johnson’s blade at the whetstone. The man putting an edge to his weapon is former Brexit secretary David Davis. 
Treacherously, he accuses the PM of ‘incipient panic’ under pressure from Brussels and has called for a full-scale Cabinet revolt against her over what he portentously calls ‘one of the most fundamental decisions that government has taken in modern times’.
For good measure, he adds: ‘This week the authority of our constitution is on the line.’
This is high-blown claptrap.
In truth, what we are witnessing is not the British constitution under threat but one of the oldest and most familiar stories in politics: An old man in a hurry.
I know Mr Davis (who’ll be 70 in December) very well. He is a thoroughly decent man and an ornament to the House of Commons.
Unlike most MPs, he’s had experience of real life outside politics, both as a director of sugar giant Tate & Lyle where he worked for 17 years and as an infantryman in the territorial SAS. And unlike many Tory MPs, he’s had to make his own way in life, being brought up by a single mother and spending his early years mainly on a council estate.
He’s been touted as a possible future Tory leader ever since he was first elected MP when Margaret Thatcher was prime minister in 1987. Indeed, he stood as a leadership candidate 13 years ago.
But for all his many qualities, he lacks the record of substantial achievement in politics that is essential for someone with his experience who seeks the top job.
Indeed, Mr Davis is chiefly notable for his record of resignations.
To misquote Oscar Wilde: ‘One ministerial resignation may be regarded as a misfortune; two looks like carelessness.’
True, Mr Davis’s two resignations have always been on points of principle – but there have, nevertheless, been too many.
The most baffling occurred ten years ago when he was shadow home secretary – causing embarrassment to his boss David Cameron when he was leader of the opposition. He stepped down to fight a by-election over his anger over the then Labour government’s plans for 42-day pre-charge detention as part of its anti-terror policy.
Mr Davis’s most recent resignation was in the summer, in protest against Mrs May’s so-called Chequers plan for Brexit. His strop made headlines for a few days.
But as Brexit secretary he should never have allowed Mrs May to have got boxed into such a tight corner by Brussels’ Brexit negotiators.
He had originally been given the job by her in recognition of his role as one of the few Tory big-hitters who had campaigned for Brexit during the 2016 referendum campaign.
Suddenly, he was offered his chance to earn a place in history and put his own imprimatur on Britain’s departure from the EU.
I’m afraid to say he failed. Most shamefully, not only was he repulsed by Michel Barnier & Co but he was weakly shoved aside by his own pro-Remain civil servants.
Equally heinous, Mr Davis gave the impression of failing to master his brief. He was considered lazy – away from his desk too often, attending, for example, the Hay Festival to listen to feminist author Margaret Atwood.
Very soon, Brussels negotiators realised that Whitehall mandarin Olly Robbins, not Mr Davis, was the man in charge.
Instead of playing a central role in this country’s biggest and most important negotiation in 40 years, David Davis had allowed himself to be sidelined.
So why should Mrs May listen to such a man? Why should Cabinet ministers be expected to heed his call to rise against her and agree with his claim that failure to get agreement on a final trade deal would leave Britain paying £39billion to Brussels for ‘a pig in a poke’?
For all his bravado, Mr Davis doesn’t seem to have noticed that his far less experienced replacement, Dominic Raab – ironically a man who was his protege and his one-time chief of staff – looks much more at ease in the job.
If Mr Davis had true self-knowledge, he would not – as he did yesterday – criticise Mrs May for ‘accepting the EU’s language’ on the Irish border issue. The fact is that the minister in charge of negotiations at the time was none other than Mr Davis himself.
But such is the dishonest and disingenuous world of politics.
Over recent months, Theresa May has been forced to put up with treachery and betrayal from some Tory colleagues.
As we reach the Brexit negotiations endgame, she – and, more importantly, the British people – deserve better than to be subjected to the flouncing egotism of a man who palpably failed in his job to secure us an orderly and proper break from the European Union.
 
As Theresa May’s doomed premiership enters its final weeks, a remarkable number of wannabe replacements have made it clear they want her job.
There is former children’s TV presenter and ex-Pensions Secretary Esther McVey, doughty leader of the House of Commons Andrea Leadsom, relatively inexperienced Health Secretary Matthew Hancock and Treasury Chief Secretary Liz Truss, who posed in a flamboyant series of outfits for photographs in a Sunday magazine last weekend.
In a field that has been compared with the starting lineup for the Grand National, Foreign Secretary Jeremy Hunt and Home Secretary Sajid Javid are both expected to grab the reins and announce their candidacies.
But until yesterday, it was Hamlet without the prince.
Enter Boris Johnson, centre stage.
Typical of the man, there was no equivocation. ‘Of course I’m going to go for it,’ he said. At once, he’s the bookmakers’ favourite.
Indeed, Mr Johnson’s timing could hardly be more propitious with Tory party ratings in freefall, according to opinion polls.
He IS the only leadership contender with mass backing among the Tory party members who will ultimately choose the next occupant of No 10.
In the Tory shires, utterly fed up with the May Government’s handling of Brexit, he is viewed as something of a national saviour. The only Conservative with the charisma, will and verve to take on and defeat Nigel Farage’s rampant Brexit Party – and see off the red menace of Comrade Corbyn.
Unlike Mrs May, who campaigned for Remain, Mr Johnson believes in Brexit. That counts a lot.
He draws the crowds. He cheers people up. For all of his faults, and despite his chaotic private life, he is a major figure in our political landscape.
I predict that if Mr Johnson is chosen by Tory MPs to make the shortlist of two who will fight it out among the 125,000 Tory party members, he will win comfortably. But will he reach the final two? Will Tory MPs sabotage his bid?
First of all, the rules of the leadership contest may be stacked against him.
Mr Johnson is not popular among Tory MPs. He is seen as aloof. He spends very little time glad-handing colleagues in Westminster tea rooms. Many don’t like him. Others envy his charm and popularity. Few trust him.
This is why plans have already been hatched to stop the blond bombshell’s bandwagon. Inevitably, dark arts are involved.
Don’t forget that the last time Mr Johnson was about to stand for the leadership – after David Cameron’s resignation – his chances were wrecked thanks to an unprecedented act of treachery.
Just minutes before a press conference where Mr Johnson was due to launch his leadership bid, his running partner, Michael Gove, withdrew his backing and said he was standing himself.
Brutally, Mr Gove questioned whether Mr Johnson’s ‘heart and soul’ were really behind Britain leaving the EU. He said he felt that Mr Johnson wasn’t ‘capable of building that team and providing that unity’ needed to see Brexit over the line.
Will Mr Gove strike again? Don’t rule it out. And is that withering assessment shared by other Tory MPs? Most likely, yes. I, too, have reservations about crowd-pleaser Boris. But this time I think it would be regrettable if he didn’t get a proper run for the leadership.
It would be a bit like the England cricket team of the 1980s taking to the field without Ian Botham. Would Argentina pick a World Cup final team without Lionel Messi?
Despite the Whips’ Office notorious ‘black book’ in which MPs’ private foibles are recorded – and Mr Johnson has many pages’ worth – one further factor should weigh heavily with Tory MPs as they decide who should replace Mrs May.
Many believe that our current problems with Brexit derive from the fact that despite the British people’s Leave vote in 2016, someone who had campaigned for Remain became prime minister.
Over 34 months, Mrs May has failed to push through Brexit. Many Tory activists are convinced that history would have been different if Mr Johnson, a true Brexiteer, had been given the task. There’s power in this argument.
By issuing Brussels’ EU negotiators with a plausible threat that Britain would leave with No Deal if they offered unreasonable terms, Prime Minister Johnson might have wrung a better Withdrawal Deal for the UK.
But that is pure conjecture.
As for the future, if he succeeds Mrs May in No 10, Mr Johnson may not be able to push through Brexit either.
Although his supporters would be optimistic that he would get a different result from Brussels, Mr Johnson is derided by most European leaders and they would most likely send him home empty-handed.
Thus, the ultra-Brexiteer would urge the Commons to go for No Deal. But that would be an uphill challenge, too, because despite a new prime minister, there would still be a robust majority of MPs against leaving the EU.
Prime Minister Johnson’s immediate target would be to push through Brexit before the next deadline, October 31. If he failed to achieve that, he would risk being one of the shortest-lived prime ministers in British history. That said, he deserves the chance to try.
Above all, if he is to be taken seriously as a Tory leadership candidate – and he’s already lost weight and tamed his hair – Mr Johnson needs to give a convincing argument over how he might be able to succeed where Theresa May has failed.
Here’s the killer question. How would he fare in a general election pitted against Jeremy Corbyn? Both men appeal to core party voters – and repel as many as they attract. But it can stated with certainty that Boris would give the Tories a raw campaigning oomph that’s been absent under Theresa May.
In the meantime, I advise Tory voters to bolt the doors and bring down the shutters. Hurricane Boris is about to make landfall.
 
Experts predicted Theresa May and her Conservative party would experience an electoral massacre.
Certainly, the results were a stinging rebuff as they lost well over 1,000 council seats.
It was even more dreadful than predicted. But the Tories were always going to do badly because the last time these seats were fought had been a high water mark for them electorally – David Cameron’s general election victory of spring 2015.
However, Labour is also a big loser in these local elections.
They should have scooped up barrowloads of votes considering we have the weakest Prime Minister in memory – and that news on polling day had been dominated by Tories being convulsed by recriminations over the sacking of Defence Secretary Gavin Williamson.
The fact is that according to the iron rule of British politics, when a government is in trouble, the Opposition is bound to benefit. Yet Labour was hit by a series of hammer blows.
The party lost control of Bolsover District Council for the first time in more than 40 years. This is the Derbyshire former mining town that’s been represented in Parliament by the veteran Labour MP Dennis Skinner since 1970.
Other key losses were the Wirral and Hartlepool councils – traditional Labour areas.
Overall, they lost more than 75 councillors and control of several local authorities. Gaining control of Trafford Council, a long-term target, was only a small compensation.
Almost as calamitous for Jeremy Corbyn was the fact that the biggest winners of the night were the Liberal Democrats, who had been written off as a political force with just 11 MPs.
Of course the Tories are still in deep trouble. But Thursday’s local election results are a brutal reminder that Labour is in no fit state to form a government.
Most pertinently, they expose the huge risk Mr Corbyn took at a meeting of the party’s governing National Executive Committee on Tuesday by not committing Labour to a second EU referendum.
Instead of doing so decisively, and thus pleasing the majority of party members who want a second vote, he sat on the fence, doubtless cynically hoping to appeal to Leave voters and Remainers at the same time. As so often has been the case with Mr Corbyn’s leadership, his cynicism and procrastination have done him no good.
His attempt to appeal to all sides has left him offending parts of both.
In the Brexit-supporting North East, voters abandoned Labour in droves. And in pro-Remain areas elsewhere, people who traditionally vote Labour defected to the Lib Dems, the Greens and other fringe candidates.
More worrying for Mr Corbyn, his flawed tactics are set to make matters more difficult for him.
There is no reason to expect Labour will do better in the European elections at the end of this month. Indeed, anecdotal evidence from canvassers suggests that Mr Corbyn himself is no longer popular.
This may be partly down to Labour’s crisis over anti-Semitism, which could intensify over the next month if the Equality and Human Rights Commission launches a full investigation.
And last week it emerged that Mr Corbyn wrote a favourable introduction to a shockingly anti-Semitic book, written by Left-wing author JA Hobson before the First World War but republished a few years ago.
In addition, while the Tories seem irrevocably split between ultra and soft Brexiteers, Labour is seriously split, too.
But the Tories have a disadvantage. They cannot agree on who should be Mrs May’s replacement.
By contrast, there is one plausible name on Labour MPs’ lips as a possible replacement for Mr Corbyn: His deputy Tom Watson.
This week, Mr Watson stormed out of a Shadow Cabinet meeting held shortly ahead of the NEC’s decision not to commit the party to back a second referendum.
Mr Watson is a supporter of what he calls a ‘People’s Vote’ and is frustrated with his boss’s refusal to commit to one. He has also warned that Labour will be beaten by the Brexit Party if it continues to ‘sit on the fence’ and offers only ‘mealy-mouthed’ support for a second referendum.
The 52-year-old Yorkshireman has transformed himself over the last few months.
Two years ago he was a 22-stone political thug with undoubted talents but a shambolic life and was often to be found in a pub. But he has now lost seven stone in little over a year.
It doesn’t take a super-brain to work out that any politician who loses weight and spruces up their appearance (Boris Johnson is another example, having lost 12lb and with an uncharacteristically neat haircut) is part of their preparation to pitch for the top job.
Meanwhile, a summer of political destruction lies ahead.
Mrs May has promised to be gone within months. And the local election results mean Mr Corbyn is in deep trouble, too.
In the short term, fresh electoral catastrophe beckons for both main parties. It’s only three weeks until the European elections – the ones that Mrs May vowed would never happen.
A new menace will appear in the form of Nigel Farage’s Brexit Party, which threatens to take away millions more Tory votes.
This takes us to the heart of the nightmare conundrum facing Mrs May and Mr Corbyn.
The Labour leader could agree a Brexit deal with the Prime Minister that would see both their parties fulfil the demands of the 2016 referendum result and take Britain out of the EU within weeks.
But if he does that, he would have thrown the Tories a lifeline and saved them from electoral wipe-out on May 23.
Most disturbingly for our country’s future, this week’s electoral results show that the leaders of the two main parties are stuck in a potential death-trap and neither has any clue how to get out.
When historians look back at this momentous week, they will struggle to choose which was the most important event.
There was Donald Trump’s first visit to Britain as president and his characteristically belligerent intervention in the Brexit debate.
Also, we saw the dramatic resignations from Cabinet of Boris Johnson and David Davis.
These two cheerleaders for Leave walked out in protest against Theresa May’s White Paper which sets out how she hopes Britain will quit the EU but which both men believe betrays the wishes of the 17 million people who voted for Brexit.
However, I believe that future historians will conclude that the most significant event this week was a little-reported meeting that took place in a Westminster committee room on Monday afternoon.
In the sweltering heat, Mrs May’s de facto deputy, David Lidington, briefed opposition MPs and peers about the White Paper in the hope of gaining their support for her Brexit negotiating strategy.
This meeting — described as ‘surreal’ by one Labour MP present — was unprecedented.
For the corralling of cross-party support for a government policy at a time when the country is not at war is very rare.
But Lidington’s overture signalled a need by ministers desperate for a Brexit solution to have a temporary ceasefire that would be impossible to achieve in the confrontational form of politics that has been the norm in Britain for more than two centuries.
I would go further and suggest that rather than a temporary phenomenon, we could witness the collapse of age-old party divisions in British politics.
For the indisputable fact is that Brexit is destroying the traditional two-party system which has seen either a Labour or a Tory government (or a coalition) ever since the collapse of the Liberals as a major force more than a century ago.
Convulsed by disagreements over Britain’s future relationship with the EU, the Conservative Party is deeply divided between those who want a hard Brexit and those instinctive Remainers who are adamant that the break from Brussels is as soft as possible.
Labour, too, is irrevocably split, with MPs representing constituencies which voted Leave battling against a phalanx of passionately pro-EU MPs who will do anything to frustrate Brexit.
I estimate that there are about 90 Brexiteer Tory MPs who may defy Mrs May. On the other side, Jeremy Corbyn faces a similar number of Labour rebels — MPs who, on Brexit, are ideologically closer to the 90 Tory malcontents. For the fact is that seven in ten Labour-held seats voted Leave and the MPs who represent them feel duty-bound to back their constituents’ wishes.
As a result, I predict that we could see the emergence of a new political landscape.
The two-party mould that has served British politics well for so long will first be broken by the creation of a specifically pro-European party, which could attract leading Remainers such as the Tories’ Nicky Morgan and Labour’s Chuka Umunna.
Meanwhile, on the other side of the debate, rather than a separate pro-Brexit party, I can see the rise of a number of anti-EU nationalist groups. They will be a motley bunch — straddling a wide political spectrum and include those on the Left who want to destroy the capitalist system and those from the Right who are free marketeers.
Ironically, this could mean Labour’s Marxist shadow chancellor John McDonnell and Jacob Rees-Mogg, an Old Etonian Tory who made a fortune in City fund management, becoming unlikely bedfellows. Of course, this would purely be a marriage of convenience.
You may think this scenario that I’m suggesting is crazy. But do not rule out the prospect that Rees-Mogg and McDonnell could join together to fight for a united vision of Britain outside the EU — albeit for very different core motives.
Of course, there is a precedent for such a cross-party alliance.
In the early 1970s, Harold Wilson’s Labour and Edward Heath’s Tories were both split over whether Britain should join the European Economic Community — a trade agreement that was the early version of the European Union.
This led to an unlikely alliance between Socialist Michael Foot (who abhorred the removal of power from the British people to Brussels) and right-winger Enoch Powell (who warned about Britain becoming a province of a European superstate).
During debates over Britain’s membership of the EEC, there were a series of votes in the Commons during which MPs on both sides rebelled against their party leadership.
Eventually, Wilson’s government decided to join the EEC and the two-party system re-established itself.
But this time, I doubt, after Brexit, that the normal order will be restored. Feelings are running so high and emotions so passionate that the two-party system — that is currently much more fragile than it was half a century ago — could be fractured for ever.
 Before a gala dinner at the Nato summit in Brussels this week, EU Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker was seen swaying and had to be given a wheelchair.
His critics were quick to suggest that the 63-year-old former Luxembourg prime minister with a reputation as a heavy drinker may have over-refreshed himself. The truth may have been that he was incapacitated by acute leg pains from which he’s said to suffer. 
By comparison, Donald Trump never drinks alcohol. The appearance of the two men together in Brussels made me think of that great newspaper editor William Rees-Mogg (father of Brexiteer Jacob) who once famously wrote that he preferred Foreign Secretary George Brown drunk to Prime Minister Harold Wilson sober.
In the spirit of the late Lord Rees-Mogg, I have to say that there are times when I prefer Juncker drunk to Trump sober.